{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fmodern JetBrains Mono;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f2\fnil Calibri;}{\f3\fnil Arial;}}
{\colortbl ;\red169\green183\blue198;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22621}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf1\f0\fs20\lang9 ACHIOTE SEEDS\par
beef\par
chicken\par
chiles\par
citrus (e.g., sour orange)\par
fish\par
game birds (e.g., duck, quail)\par
garlic\par
Mexican cuisine, esp. Yucat\f1\'e1n oil\par
pork\par
shellfish, e.g., lobster, shrimp\par
shrimp\par
Flavor Affinities\par
achiote + pork + sour orange\par
ACIDITY (See Sourness)\par
AFGHAN CUISINE\par
almonds\par
barley\par
breads\par
cardamom\par
chile pepper\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
dill\par
fennel\par
fruits, esp. dried\par
ginger\par
grapes\par
kebabs\par
lamb\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
nuts, e.g., almonds\par
pasta\par
rice, basmati\par
sesame\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
turmeric\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
almonds + cardamom + sugar\par
cucumber + mint + yogurt\par
AFRICAN CUISINE (See also Ethiopian and Moroccan Cuisines)\par
bananas\par
bell peppers\par
braised dishes\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. West African\par
coconuts\par
corn\par
fish, esp. coastal\par
fruits, esp. tropical\par
garlic\par
goat\par
greens, esp. steamed or stewed\par
mangoes\par
melons\par
okra\par
onions\par
papayas\par
peanuts\par
peas, esp. black-eyed\par
plantains\par
soups\par
stews, esp. meat or vegetable\par
sweet potatoes\par
tomatoes\par
watermelon\par
yams, esp. West African\par
AFRICAN CUISINE (NORTH) (See also Moroccan Cuisine)\par
bell peppers\par
braised dishes\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
couscous\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
eggplant\par
fish\par
garlic\par
lamb\par
mint\par
parsley\par
rice\par
stewed dishes\par
tomatoes\par
wheat\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cumin + garlic + mint, esp. Northeast Africa\par
AFRICAN CUISINE (SOUTH)\par
beans\par
carrots\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
fenugreek\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lamb\par
onions\par
peas\par
pumpkin\par
stews\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lamb + chile peppers + garlic + onions\par
AFRICAN CUISINE (WEST)\par
bananas\par
bell peppers\par
braised dishes\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
corn\par
goat\par
mangoes\par
okra\par
papayas\par
peanuts\par
plantains\par
rice\par
soups\par
stewed dishes\par
sweet potatoes\par
tomatoes\par
wheat\par
yams\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + peanuts + tomatoes\par
ALLSPICE\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add early in cooking.\par
apples\par
baked goods\par
beans\par
BEEF, esp. braised, corned, grilled, ground, raw, roasted, or stewed\par
beets\par
breads, esp. breakfast\par
cabbage\par
cakes\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
carrots\par
chicken (e.g., Jamaican style)\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cookies\par
coriander\par
currants, esp. black\par
curries and curry powder\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
eggplant\par
English cuisine\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
fruits, fruit compotes, and jams\par
game and game birds (e.g., quail)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
goat\par
grains\par
ham\par
herring, pickled\par
Indian cuisine\par
JAMAICAN CUISINE (e.g., jerk dishes)\par
ketchup\par
lamb\par
mace\par
MEATS, red, esp. braised, grilled, or roasted\par
In Jamaica, allspice is their pepper. It\rquote s fruitier than black peppercorns. I think\par
it\rquote s especially nice with braised and roasted meats.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, Mary Elaine\rquote s at The Phoenician (Scottsdale, Arizona)\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
North American cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
PUMPKIN\par
rabbit\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salsas and sauces\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
soups\par
spiced cakes\par
spinach\par
squash, winter\par
stews\par
stocks and broths, chicken\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turnips\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
West Indies cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
allspice + beef + onions\par
allspice + garlic + pork\par
ALMOND OIL (See Oil, Almond)\par
ALMONDS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Botanical relatives: peaches\par
Function: warming\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
amaretto\par
anise, esp. green\par
apples\par
apricots\par
beans\par
blackberries\par
brandy\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
butterscotch\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cayenne\par
cheese: goat, manchego, ricotta\par
cherries, esp. sour\par
chicken\par
CHOCOLATE: DARK, MILK\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
cornmeal\par
corn syrup\par
crab\par
cranberries\par
CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
currants\par
figs\par
fish\par
French pastries\par
fruits, most\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
greens, salad\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY\par
ice cream\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian sauces\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, fruit (including orange)\par
mascarpone\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican beverages and mole sauces\par
milk, sweetened condensed\par
molasses\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nectarines\par
oats\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
orange: juice, zest\par
paprika\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, ground\par
pine nuts\par
plums\par
praline\par
prunes\par
quince\par
raisins, esp. white\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shellfish\par
sherry\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. sauces\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tea\par
Turkish cuisine\par
VANILLA\par
walnuts\par
Almonds are fairly versatile in that their flavor is not very specific. When they\par
are manufactured, then they have a distinct flavor: think of Frangelico, almond\par
oil, or marzipan in dessert. In these cases, the almond has a very distinct flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
If you have some beautiful almonds, there are so many things you can do. You\par
can grind them and make a frangipane and put it in puff pastry. You can put them\par
into biscotti, a cake, or almond ice cream.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
almonds + chocolate + coconut\par
almonds + coffee + orange\par
almonds + green anise + figs\par
almonds + honey + orange zest + raisins\par
AMARETTO (sweet almond liqueur)\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
butter\par
cherries\par
chocolate\par
coffee\par
cream\par
hazelnuts\par
Italian cuisine\par
peaches\par
pork\par
sugar\par
ANCHOVIES\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
almonds\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
bell peppers, esp. roasted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
celery\par
cheese: manchego, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chives\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
fennel\par
GARLIC\par
lemon, juice\par
lobster\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mustard (e.g., Dijon)\par
nectarines\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives (e.g., black, green, ni\'e7oise)\par
onions\par
orange, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
No country in the world has anchovies like Spain. They are sophisticated, and\par
the ones from the north of Spain are best because they are bigger. Spanish\par
anchovies are not salty, either. Once you eat one, your life changes forever! I pay\par
a lot for my anchovies \f2\emdash\f1  up to seventy-five cents per fillet \f2\emdash\f1  and will have to\par
charge $9 for a plate. My customers will say that is too much to pay, and I agree\par
\f2\emdash\f1  but if you don\rquote t pay, you don\rquote t taste. Lately, I have been combining anchovies\par
with nectarines, which I love. I will make a vinaigrette with Pedro Xim\'e9nez [i.e.,\par
PX sherry], sherry vinegar, and olive oil and it is the perfect dressing \f2\emdash\f1  and\par
unique.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
peppers, piquillo\par
pizza\par
potatoes\par
puttanesca sauce (key ingredient)\par
red pepper flakes\par
romaine lettuce\par
rosemary\par
salads, esp. Caesar (key ingredient)\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
sherry, PX\par
tapenade (key ingredient)\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine, sherry\par
Flavor Affinities\par
anchovies + lemon + olive oil + rosemary\par
ANGELICA\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add late in cooking; use in baking.\par
Use to balance high-acid fruit, to reduce the need for sweeteners.\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apricots\par
candy\par
cream and ice cream\par
custards\par
desserts\par
fish\par
fruits\par
ginger: fresh, candied\par
hazelnuts\par
juniper berries\par
lavender\par
lemon balm\par
liqueurs\par
mushrooms\par
Angelica pairs well with fresh or candied ginger. And angelica with rhubarb\par
really intensifies the flavor of the rhubarb.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
nutmeg\par
oranges\par
pepper, black\par
plums\par
*RHUBARB\par
salads\par
shellfish\par
strawberries\par
Flavor Affinities\par
angelica + cream + rhubarb\par
ANISE (See also Anise, Star, and Fennel)\par
Function: warming\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add early in cooking.\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples\par
baked goods, esp. cakes, cookies\par
beets\par
breads, esp. rye\par
cabbage\par
cakes\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
cheese, esp. goat and ricotta\par
chestnuts\par
Chinese cuisine\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
cookies\par
crab\par
cream\par
cumin\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
FISH\par
fruit\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon\par
lentils\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
melon\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mole sauce\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mussels\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
orange\par
parsnips\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper\par
pickles\par
pineapple\par
plums\par
pork\par
Portuguese cuisine\par
Proven\'e7al cuisine (French)\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
rhubarb\par
salumi\par
Anise seeds and fennel are used for braising our pork belly. Fennel and pork is a\par
natural, just like in Italian sausage.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, Naha (Chicago)\par
sauerkraut\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. fish\par
star anise\par
STEWS, ESP. FISH\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, root\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
walnuts\par
ANISE HYSSOP\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
apricots\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
beets\par
berries, esp. blueberries\par
beverages\par
carrots\par
cherries\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
cream and ice cream\par
currants\par
custards\par
desserts\par
fennel bulb\par
fish\par
FRUITS, ESP. SUMMER\par
honey\par
lavender\par
lemon\par
lychees\par
marjoram\par
melons\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
oranges\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
peaches\par
pears\par
plums\par
pork\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
salads: fruit, green\par
shellfish (e.g., shrimp)\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
squash, winter\par
stone fruits (e.g., peaches)\par
sweet potatoes\par
tarragon\par
teas\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables, root\par
watermelon\par
zucchini\par
ANISE, STAR\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the beginning of the cooking process. Use in stir-fries.\par
allspice\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, pastries)\par
beef\par
beverages\par
cardamom\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
CHINESE CUISINE\par
chocolate, esp. milk\par
cinnamon\par
citrus zest\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curry powder (ingredient)\par
duck\par
eggs\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
fish\par
FIVE-SPICE POWDER\par
fruits, esp. tropical\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
kumquats\par
leeks\par
lemongrass\par
lime, zest\par
liqueurs\par
mace\par
Malaysian cuisine\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
meats, esp. fatty\par
nutmeg\par
orange, zest\par
oxtails\par
pears, esp. poached\par
As a kid, I hated black jelly beans. But I have grown to like all the various forms\par
of anise, and star anise is one of my favorites. My favorite application is when it\par
is infused with milk chocolate. It then has an almost malty-caramely quality to it.\par
It adds that little something that people can\rquote t quite identify. I also love pears with\par
anise, which works well with roasted or poached pears.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love using star anise in dishes from meats to desserts. I love how it can be kind\par
of meaty in a stew, or kind of sweet, adding bright, warm notes to a pumpkin\par
dessert.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, August (New York City)\par
pepper: black, Szechuan\par
pineapple\par
plums, esp. poached\par
pork\par
poultry\par
pumpkin\par
raspberries\par
root vegetables\par
salmon\par
sauces\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
stocks: beef, chicken\par
sweet potatoes\par
tamarind\par
teas\par
tuna\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
Vietnamese cuisine (e.g.,pho)\par
wine, rice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
star anise + cream + maple\par
star anise + milk + milk chocolate + orange zest + sugar\par
star anise + pork + soy sauce + sugar\par
APPETIZERS\par
Tips: Saltiness stimulates appetite.\par
Serve small portions so as not to satiate the appetite too early in a meal.\par
Accompany appetizers with light-bodied wines.\par
Dishes\par
Insalata A Voce: Green Apple, Marcona Almonds, Watercress, Pecorino \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Apple and Eggplant Cro\'fbte with Apple Butter, Cranberry Compote, and\par
Lemon-Poached Apples \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets\par
(Vancouver)\par
Apple Softcake with Dark Chocolate and Cinnamon Soup \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and\par
Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Saut\'e9ed Apples, Olive Oil Sponge, Maple\f2\endash\f1 Brown Butter Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1\par
Johnny Iuzzini, pastry chef, Jean Georges (New York City) Poached Granny\par
Smith Apples, Wildflower Honey, and Belgian Endive Leaves \f2\emdash\f1  Thomas\par
Keller, The French Laundry (Yountville, California) Apple-Lychee Sorbet\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York City) Caramelized\par
Apple Sundae with Butter Pecan Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, Farallon (San\par
Francisco)\par
Warm Granny Smith Apple Tart with Buttermilk Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick\par
O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) APPLES\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, caramelize, deep-fry (e.g., as fritters), grill, poach, raw,\par
saut\'e9, stew\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
The combination of apple and celery works. A tart green apple sorbet is not\par
going to knock your socks off, because you are programmed to know it. When\par
you add the flavor of celery, you get something new. I also love the flavors of\par
apple and fennel together, especially in sorbet.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I make an apple confit of thinly sliced apples with cinnamon caramel powder\par
layered between the apples and baked slowly. When the dish is served, next to\par
the apples is a small pile of dates poached in syrup with vanilla. The other\par
flavors on the plate are lemon confit, quince, raw apple with apple cider gel\'e9e,\par
and ras el hanout (a Moroccan spice blend).\par
For this dish you need a contrast for the sweetness, so the role of the lemon\par
confit is to cleanse and refresh. If the confit was not there, you would have a bite\par
of the sweet date and be done. The date and lemon is like a salad. The line\par
drawing this together is the quince and dates that come from the Middle East and\par
that was the line to ras el hanout.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
If you cook apples on top of the stove, some varieties will have a lot of juice\par
while others will have none at all. Fuji, Gala, and Golden Delicious apples tend\par
to be juicy, while Granny Smith apples are often drier. With different types of\par
apples, you often don\rquote t know exactly what they will do. So if I\rquote m going to serve\par
apples with gingerbread, I will saut\'e9 them in a little sugar and see what happens.\par
If they are letting out a bunch of juice, I won\rquote t add much sugar. If they are dry,\par
I\rquote ll add some apple juice or Calvados.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
When I make an apple pie, I won\rquote t use any fewer than three different kinds of\par
apples for their different textures and sweetnesses, which ensures that every\par
single bite is interesting. I\rquote ll use Galas or Golden Delicious apples for their\par
sweetness in the middle of the pie, and soft Jonathans or McIntoshes on top for\par
their ability to melt into the others, and Braeburns or Granny Smiths on the\par
bottom for their ability to stay firm. . . . I can\rquote t imagine an apple pie without\par
cinnamon, a splash of lemon juice, and a pinch of salt.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Apples and caramel are a wonderful combination and depending on what nut\par
you add it will take the combination in very different directions. If you add\par
pecans, it would make the combination a heavier winter dessert, versus adding\par
almonds, which would keep it lighter. Both work; you just need to decide how\par
heavy you want the dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
apple cider or juice\par
applejack\par
apricots: dried, jam, puree\par
Armagnac\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
blackberries\par
bourbon\par
brandy, esp. apple\par
brioche\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
butterscotch\par
cabbage, red\par
CALVADOS\par
CARAMEL\par
cardamom\par
celery\par
celery root\par
cheese: Camembert, cheddar, goat, Gruy\'e8re\par
cherries: dried, fresh\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cider\par
*CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
Cointreau\par
coriander\par
cranberries\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me anglaise (sauce)\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
cumin\par
currants, esp. black, and currant jelly\par
curry powder\par
custards\par
dates\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
French cuisine, esp. from Normandy\par
fris\'e9e\par
ginger\par
Apple and shiso work well together. I especially like them together in a sorbet. I\par
will use a Granny Smith apple that has a nice tartness combined with a little\par
sugar, lemon, and then the shiso. The shiso has a cumin and cinnamon flavor that\par
is a natural with apple.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
If you stay in the boundaries of what people think a dessert should be it gets very\par
hard to do something new. We explain that they already eat carrot cake. We think\par
parsnip will work instead of carrot and that kabocha squash will work instead of\par
pumpkin in a pie.\par
When people see eggplant in a dessert they automatically think it will not\par
work. You have to hide the unusual element and play up what people know\par
already. The boundaries are limitless when you think of all the crossovers\par
between sweet and savory. Duck \'e0 l\rquote orange is a fruit and meat combined, so why\par
not use bacon in a dessert? A pancake with maple syrup and bacon on the plate is\par
really sweet and savory. So people already eat these combinations\par
unconsciously.\par
For our apple-eggplant dessert, we start with a choux dough piecrust. Then we\par
layer an almond cream-like custard. Then we alternate apple and eggplant slices\par
side by side. We use baby eggplant because it has a spongy texture and sucks up\par
moisture from the cream that can otherwise make the crust soggy and absorb the\par
juice and flavor from the apples that would normally just evaporate. So when\par
you eat the eggplant and apples, the eggplant tastes like apples.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE AND CINDY DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
I have always been very fond of chef Fr\'e9dy Girardet [who earned three Michelin\par
stars at his restaurant in Switzerland before retiring in 1996]. When I was young,\par
I cooked almost every recipe from his book and visited his restaurant. One of his\par
most interesting desserts was an apple dessert made of apples in the shape of\par
little balls. The dessert broke away from cooking apples whole in the traditional\par
way, which alone inspired me. He cooked them over a very high heat for two\par
minutes and put them into a red wine reduction that had cinnamon, orange peel,\par
and sugar. This was put onto a sheet tray that needed to be shaken for an hour so\par
the apples would not dry out. The apples would absorb these flavors like a\par
sponge and would then be served with vanilla ice cream.\par
In that spirit, we transformed this dessert. We transformed the wine by\par
\ldblquote espherication\rdblquote  so that it creates a bubble of liquid that explodes in your mouth.\par
We cut apples with a melon baller, then vacuum-packed the apples with the wine\par
but cooked it in such a way that the apples stayed hard and absorbed the wine\par
flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
We serve a dish of smoked oysters with apples. We smoke the oysters over\par
applewood, and so it seemed logical to add apple to the dish. We serve it with a\par
puree of apple with juniper that just plays beautifully off the oyster.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (wASHINGTON, DC)\par
goose\par
hazelnuts\par
honey, esp. chestnut, wildflower\par
horseradish\par
ice cream\par
Kirsch\par
lavender\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
lemon thyme\par
lychees\par
Madeira\par
maple syrup\par
mayonnaise\par
meringue\par
molasses\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oatmeal and oats\par
oil: canola, hazelnut, walnut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. green, red\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley\par
peanuts and peanut butter\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pomegranates\par
pork\par
poultry\par
prunes\par
puff pastry\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins, esp. seedless, white\par
rhubarb\par
rice and rice pudding\par
rosemary\par
RUM: DARK, LIGHT\par
salads: fruit, green\par
salt, kosher\par
sauerkraut\par
sherry\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
star anise\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
sweet potatoes\par
tarragon\par
tarts\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
verjus\par
vermouth\par
vinegar: apple cider, raspberry\par
WALNUTS\par
wine: red, dry white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
apples + almonds + caramel\par
apples + almonds + Armagnac + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + raisins\par
apples + apricots + pine nuts + rosemary\par
apples + brown sugar + cream + walnuts\par
apples + Calvados + cranberries + maple syrup\par
apples + caramel + cinnamon\par
apples + caramel + cinnamon + dates + lemon confit + quince + ras el\par
hanout + vanilla\par
apples + caramel + peanuts\par
apples + caramel + pecans\par
apples + caramel + pistachios + vanilla\par
apples + celery + walnuts\par
apples + cinnamon + cranberries\par
apples + cinnamon + dark chocolate + yams\par
apples + cream + ginger\par
apples + ginger + hazelnuts\par
apples + ginger + lemon + quince + sugar\par
apples + honey + lemon thyme\par
apples + raisins + rum\par
apples + red cabbage + cinnamon\par
APRICOTS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, grill, poach, raw, stew\par
allspice\par
ALMONDS\par
amaretto\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricot brandy\par
bananas\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cayenne\par
cheese (e.g., Brie, Reblochon, ricotta)\par
cheesecake\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee and espresso\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
cranberries\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
custards (e.g., cr\'e8me br\'fbl\'e9e)\par
duck\par
foie gras\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream, esp. vanilla\par
Kirsch\par
lamb\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
liqueurs: apricot, nut\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
meringue\par
Middle Eastern stews\par
mint (garnish)\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oats and oatmeal\par
onions, esp. yellow\par
orange: juice, zest\par
orange liqueur\par
peaches\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pork\par
poultry\par
praline\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rice pudding\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
saffron\par
salads, esp. fruit, green\par
Sauternes\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
tea: apple, apricot, Earl Grey\par
*VANILLA\par
vinegar, red wine\par
walnuts\par
wine: sweet, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
apricots + almonds + cream + sugar\par
apricots + almonds + meringue + Moscato d\rquote Asti\par
apricots + apples + pine nuts + rosemary\par
apricots + cranberries + white chocolate\par
apricots + oranges + sugar + vanilla + walnuts\par
Apricots are much better cooked than raw. It is rare that you find a fruit that\par
reaches its full potential as cooked rather than raw, but an apricot is one. A so-so\par
apricot poached will turn into heaven. They are great with either chamomile or\par
lavender.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Apricot is a fruit you need to cook to help unleash its flavors. A bite of raw\par
apricot is kind of bland and doesn\rquote t excite very much. If you throw that same\par
apricot into the oven and heat it up a bit, it turns into a whole different fruit.\par
Apricot with vanilla is a match made in heaven.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
APRICOTS, DRIED\par
Techniques: poach, stew\par
allspice\par
cherries, dried\par
cinnamon\par
currants\par
custard\par
French toast\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
Madeira\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pancakes/crepes\par
pistachios\par
pork\par
prunes\par
pumpkin seeds\par
raisins\par
rice pudding\par
sugar\par
tamarind paste\par
vanilla\par
wine, sweet white (e.g., Muscat)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
dried apricots + dried cherries + ginger + orange + pistachios\par
ARGENTINIAN CUISINE (See also Latin American Cuisine)\par
beef\par
corn\par
peaches\par
pumpkin\par
sweet potatoes\par
AROMA\par
When looking to make a big impact with aroma, turn to:\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
herbs\par
pineapple\par
sous-vide cooking\par
spices\par
star anise\par
truffles\par
vanilla\par
We believe as much as 90 percent of flavor is due to aroma as oppposed to taste.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE AND CINDY DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
ARTICHOKES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, boil, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, raw, roast, saut\'e9,\par
steam, stew\par
aioli\par
anchovies\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, fava\par
beets\par
bell peppers, esp. roasted\par
bread crumbs\par
butter\par
capers\par
carrots\par
Dishes\par
Fettuccine with House-Made Pancetta, Artichokes, Lemon, and Hot Chiles\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Spring Artichoke Fritto with Yogurt, Mint, and Lemon Aioli \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew\par
Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
My mom made artichokes that we dipped in mayonnaise, so I tweaked that idea\par
for the stuffed artichoke we serve here. Panko bread crumbs are mixed with\par
chopped mint, salted, and stuffed into the artichoke cavity. The homemade\par
mayonnaise I serve is made with eggs and just a little olive oil but mostly melted\par
butter, which makes it richer and more flavorful \f2\emdash\f1  which is based on how it is\par
made for the Chinese dish of shrimp and walnuts. The mayonnaise is then\par
seasoned with anchovies, red pepper flakes, and onion confit.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
cashews\par
celery\par
cheese: Emmental, goat, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chives\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
eggs: yolk, hard-boiled\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
grapefruit\par
ham (e.g., Serrano)\par
hazelnuts\par
hollandaise sauce\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON: confit, juice, zest\par
lobster\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
MINT\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nuts: cashews, hazelnuts, walnuts\par
oil: hazelnut, peanut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives: black, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS, ESP. SWEET AND YELLOW\par
orange\par
pancetta\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
pesto\par
piquillo peppers\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads\par
SALT, KOSHER\par
savory\par
shallots\par
shellfish (e.g., crab)\par
sherry, dry\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
Spanish cuisine\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tapenade\par
tarragon, fresh\par
THYME, FRESH\par
TOMATOES\par
truffles, black\par
tuna\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, rice, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
WINE, DRY WHITE\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
artichokes + butter + garlic + lemon + parsley\par
artichokes + cream + Parmesan cheese + thyme\par
artichokes + garlic + lemon\par
artichokes + garlic + lemon + mint\par
artichokes + garlic + lemon + olive oil\par
artichokes + garlic + lemon + olive oil + thyme\par
artichokes + garlic + mint\par
artichokes + garlic + Parmesan cheese + thyme\par
artichokes + garlic + sage\par
artichokes + lemon + mint + yogurt\par
artichokes + lemon + onions\par
artichokes + mushrooms + onions + sausage\par
artichokes + olive oil + Parmesan cheese + white truffles\par
ARTICHOKES, JERUSALEM\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, blanche, cream, fry, roast, saut\'e9\par
anise\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
butter\par
celery\par
cheese, goat\par
chervil\par
chives\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
dill\par
fennel leaves\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mace\par
meats, esp. roasted\par
morels\par
nutmeg\par
oil: nut, sunflower seed\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salmon\par
salt, sea\par
Dishes\par
Jerusalem Artichoke Soup, Sweet Garlic Flan, \ldblquote Sockeye\rdblquote  Salmon Tartare,\par
Poached Quail Egg, and Crisp Sunchokes \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha\par
(Chicago)\par
Arugula Risotto with Roquefort and Pignoli Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The\par
Modern (New York City)\par
Arugula Salad with Cucumber, Mt. Vikos Feta, Mint, Coriander\par
Vinaigrette, and Ni\'e7oise Olives \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni Caf\'e9 (San Francisco)\par
Saut\'e9ed Arugula with Paneer Cheese and Roasted Cashews \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij\par
and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinegar\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Jerusalem artichoke + goat cheese + hazelnuts\par
Jerusalem artichoke + lemon + morels\par
ARUGULA (See also Lettuces \f2\emdash\f1  Bitter Greens and Chicories)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, raw (salads), saut\'e9, soups, wilt\par
almonds\par
basil\par
beans, white\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
cheese: Cabrales, feta, goat, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
corn\par
cucumbers\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fish (e.g., salmon, tuna)\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon juice\par
lettuces\par
lovage\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mesclun salad greens (key ingredient)\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
oranges, esp. blood\par
pancetta\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
radishes\par
risotto\par
salads and salad greens\par
salt, esp. sea\par
shallots\par
shellfish (e.g., shrimp)\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne,\par
red wine, sherry, white wine\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
arugula + balsamic vinegar + lemon + olive oil + Parmesan cheese\par
arugula + Cabrales cheese + endive + grapes\par
arugula + cucumber + feta cheese + mint\par
arugula + endive + radicchio\par
arugula + fennel + pears\par
arugula + pears + prosciutto\par
ASIAN CUISINE (See Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, etc.\par
Cuisines)\par
ASPARAGUS\par
Season: spring\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: blanch, boil, deep-fry, grill, pan roast, simmer, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, brown\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: ch\'e8vre, Fontina, goat, Muenster, PARMESAN, PECORINO,\par
ricotta, Romano\par
chervil\par
chives\par
crab\par
cream, heavy\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
EGGS AND EGG DISHES (e.g., coddled, hard-boiled omelets)\par
fava beans\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
ham\par
hollandaise sauce\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
lemon thyme\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
Marsala wine\par
mascarpone\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms, esp. cremini, morels, shiitakes\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: hazelnut, peanut, sesame, truffle\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions, esp. spring, yellow\par
orange\par
oysters\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peas\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
peppers, piquillo\par
Dishes\par
Ricotta Gnocchi with Asparagus, Morels, and Pine Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  Dan Barber, Blue\par
Hill at Stone Barns (Pocantico Hills, New York) Asparagus and Ricotta\par
\ldblquote Mezzalune\rdblquote  with Spring Onion Butter \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York\par
City)\par
Salad of Sacramento Delta Green Asparagus, Spring Garlic, Marinated\par
Sweet Peppers, with Young Arugula and Yellow Pepper Gastrique \f2\emdash\f1\par
Thomas Keller, The French Laundry (Yountville, California) Warm Salad of\par
Sacramento Delta Green Asparagus, Melted Cipollini Onion Rings, SoftBoiled Hen Egg, and Country Bread Croutons \f2\emdash\f1  Thomas Keller, The French\par
Laundry (Yountville, California) Green Asparagus Soup with Gyromitre\par
Mushrooms and Soft-Poached Farm Egg \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern\par
(New York City)\par
Warm Salad of Grilled Asparagus and Prawns with a Sherry Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1\par
Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia)\par
Vegetarian Sushi: Asparagus and Roasted Bell Pepper Roll \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi,\par
Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Asparagus and Morel Mushroom Salad: Pancetta, Fiddlehead Ferns,\par
Vermont Shepherd Cheese, and a Mushroom Reduction \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale,\par
Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Terrine of Green and White Asparagus, Roasted Beet Root Salad,\par
Asparagus Juices \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
pistachios\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
ramps\par
rice and risotto\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salmon\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
sauce: b\'e9chamel, brown butter, Mornay\par
savory\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes\par
turnips\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette: mustard, sherry\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine, dry white (e.g., Muscat)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
asparagus + capers + ham + shrimp\par
asparagus + cayenne + lime\par
asparagus + chervil + chives + garlic + morel mushrooms + shallots\par
asparagus + crab + morel mushrooms + ramps\par
asparagus + garlic + ginger + sesame\par
asparagus + garlic + leeks + onions + potatoes\par
asparagus + goat cheese + mascarpone + thyme\par
asparagus + ham + morel mushrooms + Parmesan cheese\par
asparagus + lemon + olive oil + black pepper\par
asparagus + morel mushrooms + ramps\par
asparagus + Parmesan cheese + eggs\par
asparagus + Parmesan cheese + pancetta + vinaigrette\par
asparagus + prosciutto + goat cheese + chervil\par
ASPARAGUS, WHITE\par
Season: spring\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: blanch, boil, saut\'e9, steam\par
Tips: Covered to deprive it of sunlight while growing, white asparagus is\par
lighter in flavor and texture than green asparagus.\par
butter\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
crab\par
eggs: whole, yolks\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon\par
mushrooms (e.g., cepes, morels, porcini)\par
mustard\par
oil, truffle\par
olive oil\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
salt, sea\par
sauces: hollandaise, mayonnaise, romesco\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tarragon\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: champagne, white\par
wine, Riesling\par
Daniel Humm of New York\rquote s Eleven Madison Park on Making\par
Asparagus Soup\par
Making and seasoning soup is one of the best ways to learn about flavor. Let\rquote s\par
make asparagus soup:\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need a lot of asparagus flavor.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need acidity.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need sweetness that will come from the asparagus.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need the right amount of salt.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need just the right amount of spice, so that it doesn\rquote t actually taste\par
spicy. We use a lot of cayenne, but you would never know it is there; it is\par
just an accent.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You need fresh lime juice to finish.\par
Soup is a play of balance when you have a lot of flavor. You can add a lot of salt\par
and it won\rquote t taste salty. You can add a lot of acid and it won\rquote t taste acidic. But\par
you still have a bold-flavored soup. It\rquote s like winemaking; at some point, there is\par
a balance of all the flavors.\par
The first thing you need to do is get all the asparagus flavor into the soup at\par
the start. We save our asparagus liquid from all the asparagus we cook to use for\par
asparagus stock.\par
Making the soup: We sweat the asparagus [that is, cook it over low heat in a\par
little fat, generally in a covered pot or pan] very slowly. When we add wine, we\par
do it multiple times, adding a little at a time and reducing it, then repeating the\par
process. What this does is concentrate the flavor at each step. It makes a big\par
difference [before adding the asparagus liquid].\par
Finishing the soup: A soup may taste seasoned, but it still needs to be \ldblquote woken\par
up.\rdblquote  You taste the asparagus, but maybe it doesn\rquote t blow you away at first. To do\par
that, you need acid and cayenne. We season the soup with lime because it is a\par
stronger acid and yet has less flavor than lemon. If I use lemon to get as much\par
acid as I need for the soup, I will need to use so much that the soup will taste\par
lemony instead.\par
Flavor Affinities\par
white asparagus + hazelnuts + Parmesan cheese + truffle oil\par
white asparagus + lemon + cepes mushrooms + parsley\par
white asparagus + mustard + olive oil + vinegar\par
ASTRINGENCY\par
Taste: astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
apples (astringent-sweet)\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
bananas, unripe (astringent-sweet)\par
basil\par
beans\par
berries\par
broccoli\par
buckwheat\par
cashews\par
cauliflower\par
coffee\par
cranberries\par
figs (astringent-sweet)\par
fruits: dried, raw, unripe\par
grapes (astringent-sour-sweet)\par
hazelnuts\par
herbs\par
honey\par
legumes\par
lentils\par
lettuce\par
mace\par
marjoram\par
okra\par
parsley\par
peaches (astringent-sweet)\par
pears (astringent-sweet)\par
persimmons\par
plums (astringent-sweet)\par
pomegranates (astringent-sour-sweet)\par
quinoa\par
rhubarb\par
rye\par
saffron\par
sprouts\par
tea\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
vegetables, raw\par
walnuts\par
AUSTRALIAN CUISINE\par
barbecued foods\par
beef\par
cheese\par
fish\par
fruits, fresh\par
lamb\par
nuts, macadamia\par
seafood\par
shellfish, esp. shrimp\par
vegetables, fresh\par
wines\par
yabbies\par
NOTE: Akin to the \ldblquote New American\rdblquote  cuisine that incorporates ingredients\par
and techniques from around the world, \ldblquote Mod Oz\rdblquote  (modern Australian)\par
cuisine combines its British heritage with influences from other parts of\par
Europe as well as Asia.\par
AUSTRIAN CUISINE\par
beer\par
cinnamon\par
coffee\par
cream\par
desserts\par
dumplings\par
goulash\par
marjoram\par
meat, esp. beef or pork\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pastries\par
potatoes\par
schnitzel\par
soups, esp. with dumplings or noodles\par
stews\par
strudel\par
wine\par
AUTUMN\par
Weather: typically cool\par
Techniques: braise, glaze, roast\par
almonds (peak: October)\par
apples (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
artichokes (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
basil (peak: September)\par
beans (peak: September)\par
bell peppers (peak: September)\par
broccoli\par
broccoli rabe (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
Brussels sprouts (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 February)\par
cakes, esp. served warm\par
cantaloupe (peak: June\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
caramel\par
cardoons (peak: October)\par
cauliflower\par
celery root (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
chard (peak: June\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
The earthy flavors of autumn come together in our chanterelle mushroom and\par
lentil soup with saut\'e9ed foie gras.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HIRO SONE AND LISSA DOUMANI, TERRA (ST. HELENA, CALIFORNIA)\par
In the autumn, I use walnut vinegar, which is red wine vinegar with macerated\par
walnuts in it. It is great on a dish of sweetbreads and hazelnuts.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
When I think of autumn, I think of apples, pears, quince \f2\emdash\f1  which is so\par
underrated \f2\emdash\f1  figs, and pumpkins.\par
I work with apples and pears, which you can start using in September,\par
especially with the early apples like Gravenstein in the Bay Area. I try not to use\par
pumpkin until close to Halloween, because no matter what you do with it, it will\par
still taste like pumpkin. It\rquote s not like berries or apples that you can do a thousand\par
things with. As a pastry chef, if I serve pumpkin too soon, people will get sick of\par
it \f2\emdash\f1  and if I take it off the menu, there is nothing to replace it with. So I try to\par
wait so I don\rquote t peak too early.\par
Figs are great for fall. The problem with figs is that there are not that many fig\par
lovers out there. There are a lot more peach, chocolate, and apple lovers than\par
there are fig lovers. When I make a fig dessert, I\rquote ll pair it with a raspberry or late\par
summer fruit so it\rquote s more likely to meet with customer acceptance.\par
In the fall, I\rquote ll make more cakes. Fall also turns into caramel season, and fall\par
fruits work so well with caramel. I keep a lighter hand with caramel in the fall\par
because it is being combined with fruit versus chocolate.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
chestnuts (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
chile peppers\par
coconut (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
corn (peak: September)\par
cranberries (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
cucumbers (peak: September)\par
dates\par
duck\par
eggplant (peak: August\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
fennel\par
figs (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
foie gras\par
garlic (peak: September)\par
gooseberries (peak: June\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
grains\par
grapes (peak: September)\par
heavier dishes\par
huckleberries (peak: August\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
kale (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 January)\par
kohlrabi (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
lentils\par
lovage (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
lychee nuts (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 November)\par
mushrooms: chanterelles (peak: April\f2\endash\f1 October), porcini (peak:\par
September\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
nectarines (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
nuts\par
okra (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
oranges, blood (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 February)\par
oysters (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 April)\par
partridge (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
passion fruit (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 February)\par
pears (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
peas (peak: June\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
persimmons (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 January)\par
pheasant (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
pistachios (peak: September)\par
plums (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
polenta\par
pomegranates (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
pumpkins (peak: September\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
quinces (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
salsify (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 January)\par
scallops\par
seeds, sunflower\par
spices, warming (e.g., black peppercorns, cayenne, cinnamon, chili powder,\par
clove, cumin, mustard, etc.)\par
squash, winter (peak: October\f2\endash\f1 December)\par
stuffing\par
sweetbreads\par
sweet potatoes (peak: November\f2\endash\f1 January)\par
tomatoes (peak: September)\par
turkey\par
vinegar, red wine\par
walnuts\par
watermelon (peak: July\f2\endash\f1 September)\par
yams (peak: November)\par
zucchini (peak: June\f2\endash\f1 October)\par
Dishes\par
Avocado and Grapefruit with Poppy Seed Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  Ann Cashion,\par
Cashion\rquote s Eat Place (Washington, DC)\par
Creamy Avocado Pudding with Pink Grapefruit Reduction and Candied\par
Zest \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
AVOCADO OIL (See Oil, Avocado)\par
AVOCADOS\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Botanical relatives: allspice, bay leaf\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: raw\par
Tips: Use to add richness to a dish.\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil and Thai basil\par
beans, black\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
butter, unsalted\par
Central American cuisine\par
chayote\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: chipotle, jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
corn and masa\par
crab\par
cream, heavy\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
dashi\par
endive, esp. Belgian\par
fennel\par
fish\par
fris\'e9e\par
fruits, esp. tropical\par
garlic\par
grapefruit\par
guacamole (key ingredient)\par
jicama\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
LIME, JUICE\par
lobster\par
mangoes\par
mayonnaise\par
Mexican cuisine\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, ESP. RED, spring, white\par
orange\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
radishes\par
rocket\par
sake\par
salads, esp. green, seafood\par
salsa\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
sandwiches\par
scallions\par
shellfish (e.g., shrimp)\par
shrimp\par
smoked fish (e.g., trout)\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
tequila\par
tomatillos\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, tarragon, white wine\par
walnuts, oil\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
avocado + bacon + scallions + tomatoes\par
avocado + basil + red onions + tomatoes + balsamic vinegar\par
avocado + chiles + cilantro + lime + black pepper + salt + scallions\par
avocado + cilantro + lime juice\par
avocado + crab + grapefruit + tomato\par
avocado + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + grapefruit\par
avocado + endive + fris\'e9e + lemon juice + sea salt\par
avocado + jalape\'f1o chiles + cilantro + cumin + garlic + lime + onion\par
avocado + lemon + smoked trout\par
BACON\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: broil, roast, saut\'e9\par
aioli\par
avocados\par
beans (e.g., black, fava, green)\par
breakfast\par
butter, unsalted\par
Avocados are so rich that we always season them with a lot of fleur de sel and\par
lemon juice, and toss them with fris\'e9e and endive. Avocados need something\par
bitter for balance.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
celery\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
eggs\par
French cuisine\par
fris\'e9e\par
greens (e.g., arugula)\par
Italian cuisine\par
lentils\par
lettuce\par
maple syrup\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms, esp. chanterelles\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
risotto\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salt\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
squash, winter\par
stews\par
stock, chicken\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bacon + arugula + egg + pork belly\par
bacon + chanterelle mushrooms + chicken + potatoes\par
bacon + chanterelle mushrooms + salmon + shallots\par
bacon + hard-boiled eggs + spinach + balsamic vinegar\par
bacon + lettuce + tomatoes\par
bacon + onions + vinegar\par
bacon + shallots + vinegar\par
bacon + spinach + winter squash\par
Bacon can be salt, fat, and/or smoke, depending on the bacon you choose. You\par
can also play with its texture, depending on whether you are using pork belly or\par
crispy bacon. It is wonderful with vegetables. The fat is delicious, so if you are\par
braising onions in bacon fat, reduce that down, and add a little onion jus and\par
vinegar, you have a great sauce. Bacon just brings another layer of flavor to the\par
vegetables. My dish of Berkshire pork chop with scarlet turnips, roasted rhubarb,\par
and smoked bacon with cherry-almond salsa seca represents the relationship\par
between fat, salt, sugar, and acid; they are all there. The bacon brings complexity\par
to the pork; the cherry brings acid balance; and the almond brings a different\par
kind of fat with crunch. The almonds in the dish are marcona, and every tenth\par
one is extremely bitter, which adds another layer of complexity.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Dishes\par
Braised Bacon with Spring Vegetables and White Horseradish Broth \f2\emdash\f1  Dan\par
Barber, Blue Hill at Stone Barns (Pocantico Hills, New York) Smoked Bacon\par
and Egg Ice Cream with Pain Perdu, Tea Jelly \f2\emdash\f1  Heston Blumenthal, The\par
Fat Duck (England)\par
Berkshire Pork Chop with Scarlet Turnips, Roasted Rhubarb, and Smoked\par
Bacon with Cherry-Almond Salsa Seca \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San\par
Francisco)\par
BALANCE\par
Tips: Seek balance in every dish you make:\par
\f2\bullet\f1  tastes (e.g., sourness vs. saltiness; sweetness vs. bitterness)\par
\f2\bullet\f1  richness (e.g., fat) vs. relief (e.g., acidity, bitterness)\par
\f2\bullet\f1  temperatures (e.g., hot vs. cold)\par
\f2\bullet\f1  textures (e.g., creamy vs. crunchy)\par
Balance taste by adding its opposite or its complement.\par
BALSAMIC VINEGAR (See Vinegar, Balsamic)\par
BANANAS\par
Season: winter\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, broil, caramelize, deep-fry, grill, poach, raw, saut\'e9\par
Tips: Sugar enhances the flavor of bananas.\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
baked goods (e.g., muffins, quick breads)\par
banana liqueur\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
breakfast\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
butterscotch\par
cakes\par
Calvados\par
CARAMEL\par
cardamom\par
cashews\par
cherries\par
chile peppers: habanero, jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
CHOCOLATE: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
COCONUT AND COCONUT MILK\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
Dishes\par
Chocolate-Banana Flan, Exotic Fruit Jelly, Spiced Fritters, Faux Foie Gras\par
Emulsion, and Cumin Gel \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets\par
(Vancouver)\par
Sticky Toffee Pudding with Bananas, Medjool Dates, Oatmeal Ice Cream,\par
Root Beer Reduction \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru (Chicago)\par
Banana-Coconut Split with Vanilla Ice Cream, Candied Coconut, Dulce de\par
Leche, Fudge Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Caramelized Banana Tart with Coconut Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell,\par
The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) Banana Tempura with\par
Black Raspberry Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington,\par
DC)\par
Macadamia Nut Tart with Banana-Rum Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Hiro Sone and Lissa\par
Doumani, Terra (St. Helena, California) Banana-Toffee Tart\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Sandy D\rquote Amato, Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
Banana Tempura with Mango Ice Cream\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Sushi-Ko (Washington, DC)\par
Banana Cr\'e8me Br\'fbl\'e9e, Citrus-Pistachio Biscuit, Beurre Noisette Ice Cream,\par
Peanut Caramel \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York\par
City) Caramelized Banana, Smoked Chocolate Ice Cream, Stout \f2\emdash\f1  Sam\par
Mason, wd-50 (New York City)\par
Dover Sole with \ldblquote Mostly Traditional Flavors\rdblquote  and Sliced Banana \f2\emdash\f1  Grant\par
Achatz, Alinea (Chicago)\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
curries\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
figs, dried\par
ginger\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
macadamia\par
mangoes: green, ripe\par
maple syrup\par
meringue\par
nutmeg\par
oats and oatmeal\par
oil, vegetable\par
orange\par
pancakes\par
papaya\par
parsley\par
passion fruit\par
A banana in a dessert is an instant sell. Everyone loves caramelized bananas!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I hate overripe bananas. We\rquote ll actually freeze whole, unpeeled bananas, which\par
will continue to ripen in the freezer and turn black. When we want bananas to\par
use as a puree, we\rquote ll pull them out and let them thaw before pureeing, and then\par
add them to a cake or mousse. The flavor is much better this way.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
I serve a banana cr\'e8me br\'fbl\'e9e that is not made in ramekins (the usual individual\par
serving cups) but cut out of a sheet pan and caramelized. I serve this set up in a\par
grid with two squares of cr\'e8me br\'fbl\'e9e, one topped with a little citrus, the other\par
with caramelized bananas \f2\emdash\f1  alternated with citrus biscuit, one topped with a\par
brown butter ice cream, and the other with caramelized banana. So I have these\par
three flavors \f2\emdash\f1  banana, citrus, and brown butter \f2\emdash\f1  tied together with a salted\par
peanut\f2\endash\f1 caramel sauce.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
A banana\rquote s ripeness will determine what you do with it. I like my bananas\par
yellow and firm. If you are going to make a bananas Foster and your bananas are\par
very yellow, you can cook them longer and they won\rquote t fall apart or turn to mush.\par
If you start with a banana that is pretty brown, the second you add heat, it falls\par
apart. A brown banana gives me shivers!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
peanuts and peanut butter\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
puddings\par
raisins\par
raspberries: red, black\par
rice\par
RUM\par
salads, fruit\par
sesame seeds\par
smoothies and shakes\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, white\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
banana + blackberries + cream\par
banana + brown butter + caramel + citrus + peanuts\par
banana + caramel + chocolate\par
banana + caramel + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + lemongrass\par
banana + coconut + cream\par
banana + cream + honey + macadamia nuts + vanilla\par
banana + cream + mango\par
banana + dates + oatmeal\par
banana + honey + sesame seeds\par
banana + macadamia nuts + rum\par
banana + oats + pecans\par
BARLEY\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Techniques: simmer\par
beef\par
butter\par
garlic\par
lemon thyme\par
mirepoix (carrots, celery, onions)\par
mushrooms: cultivated, wild (e.g., shiitakes)\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, white\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
scallions\par
soups\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, sherry\par
BASIL (See also Basil, Thai, and Lemon Basil)\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light, soft-leaved\par
Volume: mild\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Add just before serving.\par
Use to add a note of freshness to a dish.\par
apricots\par
Asian cuisine\par
beans: green, white\par
bell peppers, esp. red, roasted\par
berries\par
blueberries\par
breads\par
broccoli\par
Cambodian cuisine\par
capers\par
carrots\par
CHEESE: feta, goat, MOZZARELLA, PARMESAN, PECORINO,\par
RICOTTA\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
chocolate, white\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coconut milk\par
corn\par
crab\par
cream and ice cream\par
cucumber\par
custards\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
EGGS AND EGG DISHES (e.g., omelets)\par
fennel\par
fish, esp. grilled or poached\par
French cuisine\par
*GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
honey\par
ITALIAN CUISINE\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon verbena\par
lime, juice\par
liver\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mussels\par
mustard: powder, seeds\par
nectarines\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
Parmesan cheese\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PASTA DISHES AND SAUCES\par
peaches\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
PESTO (key ingredient)\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pizza\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
I use basil a lot. I will add it at the very end of cooking a dish, and it will totally\par
change where the dish is going. Added at the last second, it gives a minty\par
freshness that was not there before. Basil says \ldblquote fresh\rdblquote  and \ldblquote alive\rdblquote  to me. And\par
although you can get it year-round, I associate it with summer.\par
I think particularly of fish and shellfish with basil. I cook a lobster with a\par
sauce of sweet Muscat or Sauternes, curry, and lime. This is a dish that has been\par
played with. The shells have been chopped up, added to mirepoix, and turned\par
into sauce. Then there\rquote s wine. So when the basil hits, you have this whole new\par
thing going on. It opens up the dish and makes it light. It goes against the\par
\ldblquote worked-on\rdblquote  aspect of the dish.\par
In Thai cooking, you will find coconut milk\f2\endash\f1 based curry that will have whole\par
leaves of basil in it. Basil becomes something of a vegetable served this way.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love basil in syrups. It works with strawberries and any citrus fruit. The trio I\par
use the most for summer fruits like berries is basil, lemon, and vanilla. I have\par
even macerated cherry tomatoes in this combination and made them into a fruit\par
crisp.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love basil. It is more familiar than cilantro, and more people like it. I use it in\par
ceviche instead of cilantro because it is not as pungent. I combine hamachi tuna\par
with tomato, watermelon, yuzu, and sesame seeds with fresh basil and basil oil.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
sea bass\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups, esp. Asian, bean, chowder, vegetable\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squash, summer\par
summer vegetables\par
Thai cuisine (e.g., green curries)\par
thyme\par
*TOMATOES and tomato sauces\par
tuna\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. summer\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
watermelon\par
ZUCCHINI\par
AVOID\par
tarragon\par
Flavor Affinities\par
basil + coconut + curry\par
basil + garlic + olive oil + salt\par
basil + garlic + olive oil + Parmesan cheese + pine nuts\par
basil + hamachi tuna + tomatoes + watermelon\par
basil + lemon + vanilla\par
basil + mozzarella cheese + tomatoes\par
basil + olive oil + Parmesan cheese\par
BASIL, LEMON (See Lemon Basil)\par
BASIL, THAI\par
Taste: anise-or licorice-like\par
Asian cuisines\par
beef\par
coconut milk\par
curries\par
I use this in lots of vegetarian dishes because it gives them some oomph. It also\par
works well with meat dishes, from beef to carpaccio to venison. I make a Thai\par
basil pesto but make a few adjustments to the recipe or else it can look bruised\par
and take on a funky color. We will add a little pumpkin seed oil to keep it a deep,\par
rich green.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
ginger\par
lemongrass\par
noodles and noodle dishes\par
oils, esp. pumpkin seed\par
salads\par
seafood\par
soups, esp. Asian\par
Thai cuisine\par
vegetarian dishes\par
venison\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Thai basil + beef + pumpkin seed oil\par
Thai basil + coconut milk + ginger\par
BASS (See also Bass, Sea, and Bass, Striped)\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
artichoke\par
bay leaf\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chervil\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
lemon\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
saffron\par
salmon\par
salt, sea\par
shallots\par
sole\par
star anise\par
stock, fish\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
vanilla\par
wine, white\par
BASS, BLACK\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
beets\par
butter\par
cabbage, savoy\par
carrots\par
celery\par
chestnuts\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chives\par
chutney\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
duck, Peking\par
Black bass is a fish that can go with the most exotic flavors. We serve black bass\par
with Peking duck, green papaya salad, and a very light, thin chutney sauce. I\par
love Peking duck and find the flavor very soft and not \ldblquote duck-y\rdblquote  or aggressive.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
In my black sea bass in a tamarind-ginger sauce with minted baby onions dish,\par
the tamarind is acidic, and ginger is a nice flavor bridge. I put mint in the onions\par
to cut their sweetness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Paupiette of Black Sea Bass in a Crisp Potato Shell, with Tender Leeks and\par
Syrah Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Sesame-Crusted Chilean Sea Bass with Baby Shrimp, Clams, and\par
Artichokes \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington,\par
Virginia) Black Bass with Porcini Mushrooms, Braised Parsnips, and\par
Chestnuts \f2\emdash\f1  David Pasternak, Esca (New York City)\par
Grilled Pacific Sea Bass for Two with Marinated Blood Orange and Lime \f2\emdash\f1\par
David Pasternak, Esca (New York City) Crisp Black Sea Bass with OliveCaper Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Spice-Crusted Black Sea Bass in Sweet and Sour Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Jean-Georges\par
Vongerichten, Jean Georges (New York City)\par
endive\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
ham\par
honey\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
lemon, preserved\par
lime\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mushrooms, porcini\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
papaya\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
pepper, white\par
raisins\par
saffron\par
salt, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
squash: hubbard, yellow\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
turnips\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine\par
wine: red, white\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
black bass + chutney + papaya\par
black bass + new potatoes + shrimp\par
BASS, SEA\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, broil, ceviche, deep-fry, grill, pan roast, poach, roast,\par
saut\'e9, steam\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. green or white\par
beets\par
bell peppers: red, green\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER: clarified, salted, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
citrus\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
fennel\par
garlic, fresh\par
ginger, fresh\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
mint\par
mirepoix (carrots, celery, onions)\par
mirin\par
MUSHROOMS, esp. button, porcini, or shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
new potatoes\par
oil: canola, peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
onions: pearl, yellow\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
potatoes, esp. as a crust, mashed\par
radishes\par
rhubarb\par
saffron\par
sake\par
salmon roe\par
SALT, KOSHER\par
sauces: beurre blanc, brown butter\par
scallops\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shiso\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
spearmint\par
spinach, esp. baby\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, fish, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
thyme, fresh\par
TOMATOES: cherry, grape, juice, roasted\par
vanilla\par
vermouth\par
VINEGAR: champagne, red wine, rice, sherry, white wine\par
wine, dry white\par
yuzu juice\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sea bass + artichokes + basil + chives + green beans + lemon + new\par
potatoes\par
sea bass + bacon + corn + fava beans\par
sea bass + mushrooms + sesame seeds + shrimp\par
Striped bass is a hearty fish and is one of my favorites. I love roasting it with\par
the skin on to a crisp, and finishing it with butter, garlic, and thyme. It\rquote s a fish\par
that pairs well with meat, whether bacon, sweetbreads, or braised pork.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
Dishes\par
Wild Carolina Coast Striped Bass \ldblquote Riviera\rdblquote  with a Salad of Shaved Fennel,\par
Arugula, and Babaganoush, Cured Tomatoes, Spanish Olives, and Yellow\par
Pepper Broth \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Roasted Local Wild Striped Bass with Hubbard Squash, Caramelized\par
Apple, and Wild Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  David Pasternak, Esca (New York City)\par
Poached Atlantic Striped Bass, Pasilla Chili, Cocoa, Duck Consomm\'e9 \f2\emdash\f1\par
Rick Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
BASS, STRIPED Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, pan roast, poach, raw, roast,\par
saut\'e9, sear, steam\par
artichokes\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
bell peppers: red, yellow\par
bok choy\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
calamari\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chanterelles\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: dried, fresh (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
corn\par
cream\par
cucumber\par
curries and curry powder\par
dill\par
fava beans\par
fennel\par
fish sauce\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hollandaise sauce\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lime, juice\par
mint\par
monkfish\par
mushrooms, shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, picholine\par
onions: pearl, red\par
orange\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: BLACK, GREEN, WHITE\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
sauerkraut\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
squid\par
squid ink\par
stocks: fish, shellfish\par
Tabasco sauce\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes\par
truffles, black\par
VINEGAR: champagne, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
wine: port, dry white, Riesling\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
striped bass + bacon + sauerkraut\par
striped bass + bok choy + fish sauce\par
striped bass + clam broth + marjoram + spinach\par
striped bass + curry + sour cream\par
striped bass + fennel + olives + tomatoes\par
striped bass + garlic + lemon + thyme\par
striped bass + leeks + lemon juice + Dijon mustard\par
striped bass + leeks + shiitake mushrooms\par
BAY LEAF\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Weight: light, tough-leaved\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud, depending on quantity used\par
Techniques: can stand up to cooking (e.g., simmer, stew)\par
allspice\par
apples\par
beans: dried, white\par
beef\par
braised dishes\par
caramel\par
cauliflower\par
celery leaf\par
cheese dishes\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
corn\par
cream and ice cream\par
custards\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
figs\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
game birds\par
I am a little too fond of bay leaf. I use it a lot. I probably have a fondness for it\par
because I associate it with so many childhood flavors, like pot roast. It has a\par
hearty quality to it and I associate it with stocks and big flavors. I will use fresh\par
or dried bay leaf. Fresh bay leaf has fresher flavor and is surprisingly more\par
intense than dried bay leaf, but it\rquote s still not as dramatic a difference as you can\par
find with other herbs when it comes to fresh versus dried.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Inexperienced cooks will throw a handful of bay leaves into 40 gallons of veal\par
stock. What happens next is they go to make a sauce and can\rquote t figure out what to\par
do about the medicinal taste. It\rquote s the bay leaf! I\rquote ll explain they only need two or\par
three at the most.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, NAHA (CHICAGO)\par
garlic\par
grains\par
juniper berries\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
marinades\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mole sauce\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
onions\par
parsley\par
p\'e2t\'e9\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
polenta\par
pork\par
pot roast\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quail\par
rice (e.g., rice pudding) and risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salmon\par
sauces\par
sausage\par
savory\par
shellfish, shrimp\par
SOUPS\par
spinach\par
squash: summer, winter\par
STEWS\par
STOCKS AND BROTHS\par
strawberries\par
swordfish\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
tuna\par
turkey\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
venison\par
vinegar\par
BEANS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also specific beans below)\par
carrots\par
celery\par
garlic\par
lemon\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
onions\par
PARSLEY\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt\par
*SAVORY\par
thyme\par
vinegar\par
BEANS, BLACK\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer\par
allspice\par
apples\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beer\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
butter\par
Dishes\par
Black Bean Soup Flavored with Grilled Wild Ramps, Avocado Leaf, and\par
Cilantro, Studded with Sweet Roasted Chayote and Corn, Topped with\par
Green Chile Salsa and Crispy Tortilla Strips \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill\par
(Chicago)\par
Black Bean Tamales Filled with Homemade Goat Cheese in \ldblquote Guisado\rdblquote  of\par
Wild and Woodland Mushrooms, Organic Roasted Tomatoes, Green Chile,\par
and Mint; Watercress Salad \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Black Beans Fried with Garlic, Onion, and Epazote, Topped with Mexican\par
Fresh Cheese \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Carribbean cuisine\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
Central American cuisine\par
cheese: cheddar, dry feta, farmer\rquote s, Parmesan, queso fresco, smoked\par
CHILE PEPPERS: ancho, cachuca, chipotle, jalape\'f1o\par
chili powder, ancho\par
chives\par
CILANTRO\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
CUMIN\par
duck\par
egg, esp. hard-boiled\par
epazote\par
fennel seeds\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
ham and ham hocks\par
lemon\par
lime, juice\par
maple syrup\par
Mexican cuisine, esp. in the South\par
OIL: canola, olive, peanut, safflower, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS: red, white, yellow\par
orange: fruit, juice, zest\par
oregano, dried\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pepper: black, white\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salsa\par
SALT, ESP. KOSHER\par
salt pork\par
sausage\par
SAVORY\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
SOUR CREAM\par
South American cuisine\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
spinach\par
STOCKS: BEEF, CHICKEN, VEGETABLE\par
sugar: brown, white\par
Tabasco sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
vinegar: cider, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine: Madeira, sherry\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
black beans + cumin + green bell peppers + oregano\par
black beans + lemon + sherry\par
BEANS, BROAD (See Beans, Fava)\par
BEANS, BUTTER (See Beans, Lima)\par
BEANS, CANNELLINI (See also Beans, White)\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, puree, simmer\par
bacon\par
carrots\par
celery\par
clams\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
olive oil\par
Dishes\par
Cannellini Bean Soup with Smoked Trout Croquette and Pumpkin Seed Oil\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
onions, esp. Spanish\par
paprika, sweet\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pepper, black\par
saffron\par
salads\par
salt, kosher\par
sausages (e.g., chorizo)\par
SAVORY\par
soups\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes, esp. plum\par
BEANS, FAVA (aka Broad Beans or Horse Beans)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, puree, simmer\par
Asian cuisine\par
bacon\par
basil\par
butter, unsalted\par
CHEESE: dry feta, manchego, Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta, sheep\rquote s milk\par
chile peppers\par
chives, fresh\par
cilantro\par
corn\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
duck\par
falafel (key ingredient)\par
fennel\par
fish (e.g., salmon)\par
garlic\par
gnocchi\par
greens, bitter\par
ham\par
herbs\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
lobster\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint (e.g., Italian cuisine)\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
OIL, walnut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions, esp. spring\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
poultry (e.g., turkey)\par
prosciutto\par
rabbit\par
radishes\par
Fava beans have a great flavor. Cooks in the past would blanch them, and the\par
flavor would be left in the water. Today, what I like to do with favas and other\par
vegetables is to put them in a pan with a little water, olive oil, or butter, and to\par
cover them while they cook. That way, all the flavor stays in the vegetables. If I\par
could cook for my customers the way I like to cook and eat at home, I would\par
sweat some spring onions in a pan with butter or oil, covered, to keep in the\par
flavor. Then I\rquote d add the shucked fava beans and let them cook with a little water.\par
At the last second, I\rquote d toss in some chopped parsley or basil, and there\rquote s your\par
sauce. This would be great under some fish. If you added some thyme and\par
maybe a little lamb jus, it would also work with lamb.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Fava beans have a very delicate flavor, I like them raw and tender by\par
themselves \f2\emdash\f1  or combined with sheep\rquote s milk cheese and olive oil. However, I\par
wouldn\rquote t use an olive oil that\rquote s too peppery or spicy, because it would\par
overwhelm them.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
rice and risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage, fresh\par
salads\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
SAVORY (e.g., as in French cuisine)\par
shellfish (e.g., lobster)\par
shallots\par
soups\par
spinach\par
steak\par
stir-fries\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, cider\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fava beans + basil + spring onions\par
fava beans + garlic + olive oil + rosemary\par
fava beans + lamb + thyme\par
fava beans + olive oil + pecorino cheese + prosciutto\par
fava beans + olive oil + thyme\par
fava beans + sheep\rquote s milk cheese + olive oil\par
BEANS, FLAGEOLET\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: simmer\par
apples\par
arugula\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
butter\par
carrots\par
cassoulet\par
celery\par
cheese, esp. manchego or pecorino\par
chicken\par
cream\par
fines herbes\par
fish (e.g., cod)\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
garlic\par
*LAMB\par
lemon, juice\par
lime\par
marjoram\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red, sweet, yellow\par
orange\par
PARSLEY\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
pork, esp. roasted\par
poultry\par
salads\par
salt\par
SAVORY\par
shallots\par
soups\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
vinegar, red wine\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
flageolet beans + garlic + thyme\par
BEANS, GARBANZO (See Chickpeas)\par
BEANS, GREEN\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, grill, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
BASIL\par
Dishes\par
Pasta with Basil Pesto, Green Beans, and Potatoes \f2\emdash\f1  Lidia Bastianich,\par
Felidia (New York City)\par
bay leaf\par
beans, shell\par
bell pepper, red\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: Asiago, blue, feta, goat, PARMESAN\par
chervil\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coconut\par
corn\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry leaves\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
fennel\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
ham (e.g., Serrano)\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon balm\par
lime, juice\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard seeds, black\par
nuts\par
OIL: peanut, sesame\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives: black, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS, esp. green, pearl, or red\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
paprika: smoked, sweet\par
PARSLEY\par
peanuts\par
pepper: black, white\par
Pernod\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
SAVORY, SUMMER\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tamari\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR: red wine, rice wine, sherry, tarragon, white wine\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
green beans + anchovies + garlic + Parmesan cheese + walnuts\par
green beans + mustard + prosciutto + vinaigrette + walnuts\par
BEANS, KIDNEY\par
Taste: sweet-astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, simmer\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
bell pepper, esp. red\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chili\par
chorizo\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curry leaves\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine, esp. Tuscan\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red, sweet, white\par
PARSLEY\par
pepper, black\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
saffron\par
salt\par
sauerkraut\par
SAVORY\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
wine, red\par
BEANS, LIMA\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer, steam\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
butter\par
Central American cuisine\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curries\par
dill\par
fish\par
garlic\par
greens, bitter\par
ham and ham hocks\par
herbs\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mint\par
New England cuisine (e.g., succotash)\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pepper, ground\par
poultry, esp. chicken\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
shallots\par
shellfish (e.g., shrimp)\par
sorrel\par
soul food cuisine\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
spinach\par
steak\par
succotash (key ingredient)\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
tuna\par
vinegar\par
BEANS, NAVY\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer\par
bacon\par
baked beans\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
cayenne\par
cheese: Parmesan, ricotta\par
chili powder\par
garlic\par
ketchup\par
molasses\par
mustard: Dijon, yellow\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, ESP. YELLOW\par
PARSLEY\par
pasta\par
pepper\par
salads\par
salt, kosher\par
SAVORY\par
soups\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, red wine\par
BEANS, PINTO\par
Season: winter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: refry, simmer\par
bacon\par
cheese: feta, queso fresco\par
chile peppers: chipotle, jalape\'f1o, poblano, serrano\par
chili\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
epazote\par
garlic\par
Mexican cuisine, esp. northern\par
mint\par
oil: safflower, vegetable\par
onions, white\par
oregano, dried\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY\par
pork\par
refried beans (key ingredient)\par
SALT\par
SAVORY\par
scallions\par
sour cream\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
tequila\par
tomatoes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pinto beans + bacon + poblano chiles + tomatoes\par
BEANS, RED\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer\par
bell peppers, esp. green\par
chile peppers\par
chili (key ingredient)\par
chorizo\par
garlic\par
Mexican cuisine\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
PARSLEY\par
pork\par
sausage\par
SAVORY\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
stews\par
BEANS, WHITE (e.g., Cannellini, Navy)\par
Season: winter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
ale or beer, dark\par
ancho chili powder\par
apricots, dried\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bouquet garni\par
bourbon\par
broccoli rabe\par
Dishes\par
A Latin Cassoulet of White Beans, Sausages, Smoked Bacon, and Kale\par
Braised Slowly in the Wood-Burning Oven, with Spicy Sauce and Rice \f2\emdash\f1\par
Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Soup: White Bean Puree with Rosemary Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni Caf\'e9 (San\par
Francisco)\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cheese: manchego, Parmesan, Pecorino Romano\par
chile peppers, dried\par
chives\par
cloves\par
cream\par
fennel\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, ground\par
Italian cuisine\par
ham\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
maple syrup\par
mirepoix (carrots, celery, onions)\par
molasses\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, dry\par
OIL, peanut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
ONIONS (e.g., cipollini, red, sweet)\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pork\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
rum, dark\par
sage\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
SAVORY\par
shallots\par
soups\par
squash, winter\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar, brown\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
truffles\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider, red wine\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
white beans + olive oil + pecorino cheese\par
white beans + olive oil + rosemary + balsamic vinegar\par
white beans + broccoli rabe + wild mushrooms\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: See also individual cuts of beef.\par
Tips: Clove adds richness to beef.\par
allspice\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, green\par
b\'e9arnaise sauce\par
beer\par
bouquet garni\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese, blue (e.g., Cabrales)\par
chiles, esp. dried and pasilla\par
chives\par
chocolate and cocoa powder\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee and espresso\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cornichons\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
fat: chicken, goose\par
foie gras\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
herbs\par
horseradish\par
hyssop\par
leeks\par
marrow, beef\par
mint\par
miso, red\par
mushrooms, esp. porcini or shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
Dishes\par
\ldblquote Brasato al Barolo\rdblquote  Braised Beef with Porcini Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali,\par
Babbo (New York City)\par
Mochomos: Crispy, Crunchy Shredded Montana Natural Beef with Crispy\par
White Onion Strings, Guacamole, Spicy Chile Salsa, and Warm Tortillas for\par
Making Soft Tacos \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Topolobampo (Chicago)\par
Balsamic-Caramel Beef Cubes with Sticky Rice and Toasted Coconut \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Chateaubriand, Wild Mushrooms, Porcini-Flavored Diced Yukon Gold\par
Potatoes, Syrah Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Michel Richard, Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
Ground Beef with Cream and Fenugreek on Yucca \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru\par
Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
I love blue cheese with beef. We make a dish with blue cheese sauce that has\par
chicken stock, Dijon mustard, truffle juice, and fresh truffle. This is a sauce that\par
has many layers of flavor. The mustard is barely there but adds much more\par
flavor to the sauce than vinegar or lemon would. The sauce is served on a [beef]\par
filet that has been poached in spiced red wine. The poaching liquid is made with\par
Cabernet Sauvignon that has been reduced for 25 minutes to concentrate its\par
flavor, juniper berries, pepper, star anise, fennel seeds, and cloves. The cooked\par
tannin in the wine really brings up the meaty flavor of the beef.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
All cuts of beef have a different flavor profile: There is the big beefy flavor of\par
the strip steak, the luxurious tenderness of filet mignon, and the juicy, fatty\par
mouthfeel of a great rib eye. Skirt steak is a juicy cut that is great served as an\par
open-faced sandwich. Hanger steak has an offal quality to it and is different from\par
all the others. Braised short ribs pick up all of the flavors of what they are\par
cooked with, developing layers of deep, dark beef flavor after being cooked on\par
the bone for hours.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
We make a wood-grilled 18-ounce \ldblquote prime\rdblquote  rib eye of beef with a gratin of\par
macaroni and goat cheese, glazed shallots, oxtail red wine sauce, and fleur de\par
sel. This dish is meat on meat on meat! We have the steak, oxtail sauce, and\par
shallots braised in veal stock. This dish has so much flavor. You have the\par
richness and fattiness of the rib eye, and we grill it over a wood fire that takes it\par
to a whole other place. Top it with a drizzle of olive oil, the fleur de sel, cracked\par
pepper, and then add rich oxtail sauce to it. People go crazy for it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, NAHA (CHICAGO)\par
oil: canola, sesame\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS: green, red, Spanish, yellow\par
orange\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: BLACK, white\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salt:fleur de sel, kosher\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach (accompaniment)\par
stocks: beef, chicken, veal\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
truffles\par
turnips\par
You can braise brisket for hours, and it still tastes like brisket, making it ideal to\par
prepare for large parties. Nothing is better than what the Texans do with brisket,\par
and that is barbecue. I also noticed that Texans get the fattiest brisket I have ever\par
seen, so the fat just melts away and the meat is self-basting. My favorite\par
barbecued brisket is from Mueller\rquote s outside of Austin. He cooks it about twenty\par
hours and then wraps it in brown butcher paper to let it rest \f2\emdash\f1  which I think is\par
the key to his barbecue.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: cider, red wine, rice wine, sherry, tarragon\par
wine: red (e.g., Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot), Madeira\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beef + beer + onions\par
beef + garlic + ginger\par
beef + garlic + tomatoes\par
beef + mushrooms + potatoes\par
beef + mushrooms + red wine\par
beef + porcini mushrooms + red wine\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  BRISKET\par
Techniques: barbecue, braise, corn, roast, simmer, smoke\par
barbecue rub\par
barbecue sauce\par
bay leaf\par
beer\par
cabbage, with corned beef brisket\par
chili powder\par
cinnamon\par
cumin\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
horseradish\par
maple syrup\par
mirepoix\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pasilla peppers\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
salt\par
soups\par
star anise\par
stews\par
stock, beef\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
vinegar: sherry, wine\par
wine, red\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  CHEEKS\par
Techniques: braise\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery root\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
garlic\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
mustard\par
oil, peanut\par
onions\par
pasta (e.g., gnocchi, ravioli)\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes, esp. mashed and/or new\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
salt, kosher\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables, root\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine, red (e.g., Burgundy)\par
Dishes\par
Kobe Beef, Saut\'e9ed Foie Gras, Shaved Black Truffle, Madeira Sauce on an\par
Onion Bun \f2\emdash\f1  Hubert Keller, Burger Bar (Las Vegas)\par
Kobe Beef Carpaccio, Shaved Parmesan, Arugula, and Horseradish Sauce\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Frank Stitt, Highlands Bar and Grill (Birmingham, Alabama) BEEF \f2\emdash\f1\par
KOBE\par
arugula\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chives\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
horseradish\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Madeira\par
mushrooms\par
oil, sesame\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
salt, sea\par
sesame seeds\par
soy sauce\par
truffles, black\par
yuzu juice\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  LOIN (aka shell, sirloin, tenderloin)\par
Techniques: pan roast, roast\par
butter, unsalted\par
five-spice powder\par
ginger\par
oil, peanut\par
paprika\par
pepper: black, white\par
rosemary, fresh\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sauces\par
soy sauce\par
thyme, fresh\par
wasabi\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  OXTAILS\par
Techniques: braise, stew\par
allspice\par
anise\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. white\par
beer\par
bell peppers\par
cheese: Asiago, pecorino\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
gnocchi\par
leeks\par
Madeira\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS\par
orange\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pasta (e.g., ravioli, tortellini)\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes, esp. mashed\par
risotto\par
salt\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
soups\par
stews\par
stocks: beef, chicken\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
WINE, RED\par
wine, white\par
Dishes\par
Cream of Sweet Onion, Braised Beef Oxtail, Aged Parmesan Tuile \f2\emdash\f1  Jean\par
Joho, Everest (Chicago)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
oxtails + parsnips + red wine\par
oxtails + red wine + thyme + tomatoes\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  RIBS\par
Techniques: barbecue, braise, (dry) roast\par
barbecue sauce\par
spice rub\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  ROAST\par
Techniques: roast\par
brandy\par
chocolate\par
coffee\par
garlic\par
horseradish\par
mushrooms, wild\par
rosemary\par
sauces: b\'e9arnaise, red wine (esp. Madeira or port)\par
soy sauce\par
thyme\par
wine, red\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  ROUND\par
Techniques: grill, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
bell peppers: red, green\par
chili powder\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
lime, juice\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
parsley\par
radishes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  SHANK\par
Techniques: braise\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
onions, green\par
paprika\par
pepper, black\par
sesame oil\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  SHORT LOIN\par
This is the T-bone steak. When it is cut double cut [that is, twice as thick], that is\par
when it is a porterhouse. The story goes that it was first served in Lower\par
Manhattan in 1815 at a porter house. The owner ran out of his usual cut of meat,\par
and when a customer asked for something to go with his porter [beer], the owner\par
cut him this huge piece of meat. It became known as a \ldblquote porterhouse\rdblquote  steak. The\par
porterhouse steak is part filet mignon and part strip steak. It is the perfect grilling\par
steak. You get the tenderness of the filet, and the big beefy chewiness of the strip\par
steak.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  SHORT RIBS\par
Techniques: barbecue, braise, stew\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beer or ale\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery: stalk, leaves\par
celery root\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, esp. hot cherry\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
garam masala (Indian cuisine)\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
gremolata\par
grits\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms: porcini, wild\par
mustard: Dijon, Meaux\par
molasses\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, hazelnut, peanut, sesame, vegetable, walnut\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, esp. green, pearl, white, or yellow\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
Vikram Vij of Vancouver\rquote s Vij\rquote s on Beef Short Ribs in Cinnamon\par
For braising, I prefer to use cinnamon bark. Cinnamon stick is pretty, but it is\par
steamed and rolled and a little too manipulated. In this dish, cinnamon bark is\par
big and intense and not needed for presentation. At the end of the braise, you\par
pull it out and throw it away. This dish is cooked for four hours and the\par
cinnamon flavor does not cook out. In the end, the cinnamon imparts a delicate,\par
sweet, aromatic flavor. It adds contrast to the chile flavor from the curry. If this\par
dish ever has too much cinnamon flavor, you can counterbalance it with rice or\par
yogurt that has a little salt and pepper in it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VIKRAM VIJ, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
PEPPER: black, Szechuan, white\par
potatoes, esp. mashed\par
prosciutto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry\par
soy sauce\par
star anise\par
STOCK: BEEF, CHICKEN, VEAL\par
sugar: brown, white (pinch)\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
THYME, FRESH\par
tomatoes, tomato paste, and tomato sauce\par
turnips (accompaniment)\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
WINE, DRY RED (e.g., Barolo, Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Zinfandel)\par
wine, white, esp. fruity\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
Dishes\par
Short Ribs with Braised Boston Lettuce, Peppered Shallot Confit \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Braised Short Ribs with Parsnip Puree, Porcini Mushrooms, and Barolo \f2\emdash\f1\par
Scott Bryan, Veritas (New York City)\par
Slow-Roasted Short Ribs with Stone-Ground Grits \f2\emdash\f1  Cesare Casella,\par
Maremma (New York City)\par
Garlic Braised Short Ribs with Parsnip Puree, Baby Round Carrots in\par
Carrot Butter, Haricots Verts, and Cabernet Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Colvin\par
Run (Vienna, Virginia)\par
Braised Short Ribs of Beef with Soft Grits and Meaux Mustard Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
Gray Kunz, Caf\'e9 Gray (New York City)\par
Braised Short Ribs of Beef, Wild Boar Bacon, and Cauliflower Puree with\par
Roasted Winter Root Vegetables and Cipollini Onions, Smoked \ldblquote Manuka\rdblquote\par
Sea Salt, and Herb Salad \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Short Ribs Braised and Then Caramelized on the Grill with Ginger and Soy\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Braised Short Ribs in Red Wine Sauce, Brown Loaf Sugar and Mustard\par
Crust, Stir-Fried Quinoa and Swiss Chard \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama\par
(Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Beef Short Ribs in Cinnamon and Red Wine Curry \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru\par
Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
Short ribs are a luxurious cut of meat, because they are braised for three to three\par
and a half hours. We don\rquote t braise our ribs in red wine, but in Yuengling Porter,\par
which has ethereal chocolate notes in the aroma. In the sauce with the beer is\par
mirepoix, a sachet of herbs, lots of peppercorns, and chiles. I went to a charity\par
event where they served short ribs for six hundred guests, and one reason it\par
worked is because it is a cut that allows for a great margin of error. You cook it\par
until it is well done and falling-off-the-bone tender. Falling-off-the-bone tender\par
is one of the appeals of a braised dish. It is sensual. Get yourself a glass of good\par
spicy Syrah with that short rib dish and think great thoughts!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
short ribs + bay leaf + beer + mushrooms + mustard\par
short ribs + beer + garlic + horseradish + onions + potatoes + tomatoes\par
short ribs + carrots + mushrooms + parsnips\par
short ribs + celery root + horseradish\par
short ribs + cinnamon + tomatoes + red wine\par
short ribs + horseradish + lemon + parsley\par
short ribs + onions + potatoes + red wine\par
short ribs + potatoes + root vegetables\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: IN GENERAL\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
aligot (French garlic-cheesy pureed potatoes)\par
allspice\par
arugula\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
b\'e9arnaise sauce\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cayenne\par
celery root\par
chard\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
five-spice powder\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
GARLIC\par
I like to keep it simple and serve steak au poivre with a peppercorn crust and\par
deglazed with bourbon or even good ole American rye, which has more flavor. I\par
also like steak with a margarita sauce, which is a good, zingy sauce made with\par
tequila, orange, and lemon zest, and finished with roasted chile peppers.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
ginger, fresh\par
herbs, esp. herbes de Provence\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
juniper berries\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
marrow\par
mushrooms (e.g., chanterelles, cremini, shiitake)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: canola, grapeseed, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions: red, white\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: black, green, pink, Szechuan, white\par
port\par
potatoes, French fries\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salt, kosher\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: beef, veal\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, Chinese black, cider, red wine, rice wine,\par
sherry, white wine\par
watercress\par
WINE, DRY RED (e.g., Beaujolais, Chianti)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
steak + arugula + Parmesan cheese + balsamic vinegar\par
steak + bacon + potatoes + red wine\par
steak + Chianti + lemon + salt\par
steak + cremini mushrooms + watercress\par
steak + horseradish + mustard + potatoes\par
steak + shallots + red wine\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: CHUCK\par
Techniques: braise, grill, stew\par
This cut is really beefy, flavorful, and fatty, but tough. Chuck steak can be\par
grilled, but it also works well for braising. A chuck also makes a good cut for\par
stew because it has nice fat. When I was growing up, a \ldblquote steak Episole\rdblquote  was\par
chuck steak that had good fat, was seared well, and then cooked slowly with\par
tomatoes, onions, and fresh oregano. You may not see chuck steak a lot on\par
menus, but you see it a lot in burgers. In fact, this is my favorite meat for a\par
burger. I like my mix to be 75 to 80 percent lean and 20 to 25 percent fat.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: FILET MIGNON (aka Beef Tenderloin)\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
bacon\par
butter, unsalted\par
cognac\par
cream\par
foie gras\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
mushrooms, esp. morels, porcini\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pepper: black, green\par
port\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
salt\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
stocks: beef, mushroom, veal\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine: dry red, Madeira\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: FLANK\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
chile peppers, esp. chipotle or jalape\'f1o\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
hoisin sauce\par
honey\par
lime, juice\par
molasses\par
mustard, brown\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
oregano\par
salsa, esp. tomato\par
salt\par
soy sauce\par
Dishes\par
Seared Rib Eye, Caramelized Yukon Gold Potatoes, and Chanterelles \f2\emdash\f1\par
Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Strip Loin Poached in Butter and Roasted with Sea Salt, Short Ribs Stuffed\par
in Cremini Mushrooms with Potato Boulang\'e8re, Spinach Puree, and Foie\par
Gras Hollandaise \f2\emdash\f1  Jeffrey Buben, Vidalia (Washington, DC)\par
Dry-Aged New York Steak with Slow-Cooked Broccoli, Garlic, and Lemon,\par
Fingerling Potatoes, Ni\'e7oise Olive Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San\par
Francisco)\par
Skirt Steak Marinated in Seville Oranges and Lime Juice \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla,\par
Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Strawberry Mountain New York Strip, Grilled Lettuce, Olive Oil\f2\endash\f1 Poached\par
Tomato, and Lemon Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Cory Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
Cast Iron\f2\endash\f1 Seared Porcini-Crusted New York Sirloin Steak, Roasted Garlic\par
Mash Potatoes, Black Trumpet Ragout, Braised Kale, Rum au Poivre \f2\emdash\f1\par
Allen Susser, Chef Allen\rquote s (Aventura, Florida)\par
Filet mignon gets no respect from many chefs because it doesn\rquote t have much\par
beef flavor, but it is still the most popular cut in restaurants. I like to sear it and\par
pan roast it with a little olive oil or an olive oil and butter combination. It is not a\par
well-used muscle on the inside of the short loin, so filet is always tender. On the\par
other side of the bone from the more worked side of the strip steak is the tail end\par
of the filet. B\'e9arnaise sauce [i.e., vinegar, shallots, egg yolks, butter, etc.] is a\par
classic accompaniment to filet mignon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Grilled Filet Mignon, Crisp Potatoes, Spinach, and Roasted Garlic Custard\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Tournedos of Beef Tenderloin Worthy of a Splurge: Twin Filets of Beef\par
Tenderloin Set on Brioche Toast, Slathered with Foie Gras Butter, and\par
Served with Truffle Sauce, Port-Braised Cipollini Onions, Fingerling\par
Potatoes, Spring Mushrooms, and Leek Puree \f2\emdash\f1  Janos Wilder, Janos\par
(Tucson)\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
Dishes\par
Flank Steak with Marinated Mushrooms, Artichokes, Tomatoes, Summer\par
Squash, Whipple Farm Greens, Yellow Taxi Tomato Vinaigrette, and BasilGarlic Aioli \f2\emdash\f1  Jeffrey Buben, Vidalia (Washington, DC)\par
Green Peppercorn Marinated Flank Steak with Balsamic Roasted Onions,\par
Tomatoes, and Thai Barbecue Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter, Trotter\rquote s to Go\par
(Chicago)\par
Miso-marinated grilled steak will help to release the flavors of everything else\par
you pair with it. Use red miso alone, or in combination with garlic, ginger, mirin\par
[sweet rice wine], sesame oil, soy sauce, and/or sugar.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HIRO SONE, Terra (St. Helena, California)\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: HANGER\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
bell peppers\par
brandy\par
celery root\par
ginger\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
onions\par
parsnips\par
pepper, black\par
salsa verde\par
scallions\par
soy sauce\par
thyme\par
wine, red\par
Dishes\par
Hanger Steak Pizzaiola with Local Peppers, Salsa Verde, Natural Juices \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: RIB EYE\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
garlic\par
mushrooms, porcini (dried)\par
olive oil\par
oregano\par
pepper, black\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK: SKIRT\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
anchovies\par
Skirt steak comes in a long strip and looks like a belt \f2\emdash\f1  it\rquote s about two feet long\par
and a couple of inches wide. This is an incredibly flavorful cut and delicious. It\par
is very reasonably priced as well. It is very popular in the Latin community,\par
especially with Argentinians. You often see it flattened with a mallet to tenderize\par
it [by breaking the meat fibers] and used in fajitas. This, along with the hanger\par
steak, is the beefiest flavored cut of beef. We serve it in a chimichurri sauce,\par
which is a classic Argentinian sauce made of chopped garlic, onion, and parsley,\par
plus white [we use champagne] vinegar, red pepper flakes, and a little olive oil.\par
It grills really well.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
butter\par
capers\par
chile peppers, ancho\par
cinnamon\par
cumin\par
endive, Belgian\par
garlic\par
lime: juice, zest\par
mustard\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
soy sauce\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
BEEF \f2\emdash\f1  STEAK TARTARE\par
We make tartare from filet mignon and hand-chop it to order, which I like so\par
that I don\rquote t feel like I\rquote m just eating ground beef. I season our tartare with\par
mustard, capers, and anchovies, which I am not shy about. You want the texture\par
of the beef to be a counterpoint.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Michael Lomonaco of Porter House New York on Cooking Steak\par
Aging: Aging is important because it tenderizes the steak. The aging process\par
breaks down the fibers and dehydrates the steak, concentrating its flavor. A dryaged steak has a more minerally and sharp edge to it, versus fresh meat that\par
tastes sweeter. It is critical to the flavor and adds to the cost because it takes four\par
weeks of aging to achieve it.\par
Seasoning: All our steaks are seasoned with coarse kosher salt and freshly\par
ground black pepper just prior to cooking, which draws out the flavor while they\par
cook. A squeeze of lemon makes a good Tuscan steak taste even better. If you\par
are in Italy and eating \ldblquote bistecca Fiorentina,\rdblquote  what you are having is an Italian\par
porterhouse. The steak is grilled over dried grape vines and served with a drizzle\par
of green olive oil from the first pressing of the new harvest and lemons on the\par
side.\par
Cooking: A steak should be cooked rare to medium rare. \ldblquote Rare\rdblquote  is a little\par
cool inside and hot on the exterior. \ldblquote Medium rare\rdblquote  is just a shade past, and only\par
warm in the middle. Cooking a steak beyond that point, it starts to toughen up\par
and the fat oozes out, making it increasingly dry and tough.\par
Saucing: Part of looking forward is looking back. Sauces provide the\par
connection to historical French and Italian cooking. In the gastronomic world,\par
the saucier was the top cook in the kitchen. It is all about building layer upon\par
layer of complexity in a sauce. It is most often sweet and sour, to cut through the\par
richness of the fat of the steak. Red wine sauce has the acidity to cut richness,\par
with sweetness from caramelized shallots, and it enhances the beef flavor. We\par
also make a homemade barbecue sauce as our steak sauce, which is sweet from\par
light brown sugar and molasses, tart from red wine vinegar, and smoky from\par
chipotle peppers.\par
Hanger steak is known as an onglet in French and is found on bistro menus. It is\par
also a great value, which is why you see it on menus in smaller restaurants. A\par
hanger steak is incredibly flavorful. There is only one per carcass, and it comes\par
from the area close to the kidneys, so it has almost an offal flavor to the beef. It\par
has become popular because it is different and not a typical-tasting steak. I like a\par
hanger steak grilled and served rare to medium rare. Slicing is also important,\par
because you have to cut it on the bias so that it is tender. I like a hanger steak\par
served with a traditional sauce, such as a caramelized shallot and red wine sauce\par
or a bourbon peppercorn sauce. It is important to caramelize the shallots so they\par
get sweet and offset the gaminess of the steak. I use bourbon instead of cognac\par
because it has more punch to it, and I\rquote ll use four different peppercorns \f2\emdash\f1  white,\par
black, pink, and green \f2\emdash\f1  with the last two modulating the flavor. Green\par
peppercorns have the sharpness to cut through the richness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Rib steak is the most popular cut next to filet mignon. The cut comes from the\par
rib roast, where one end meets the chuck at the fattier end and the other meets\par
the short loin at the leaner end. The rib steak that meets the chuck end is the\par
most popular and can even have a big knot of fat in it. This is one of my favorite\par
steaks. A big, fatty, juicy rib steak can\rquote t be beat on the grill. I cook these bone-on\par
because it gives more beef flavor. We do a Brandt Ranch cut that comes from\par
California just north of Mexico. That area has lots of flavor influences, so I\par
choose to do a chili rub on the steak. The cut is Holstein, which has a sweeter\par
edge to its meat. We grill it so that fat melts away and bastes it as it cooks. At the\par
end, we brush it with a blend of ancho chili, light brown sugar, toasted ground\par
cumin seeds, chipotle chile, and a pinch of cayenne. Then we char it one more\par
time, so that is like reseasoning the meat.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
The sirloin is a good, beefy-flavored high-quality cut. It is a cut toward the back\par
of the animal that gets more work, so it is a little chewy, but it is a good-quality\par
steak for barbecuing. If this cut is quickly cooked over high heat on a grill, not\par
overcooked, and sliced correctly on the bias, you are going to get the most out of\par
it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
When you see rare roast beef, it is top round. It is a little tough, and that is\par
why you see roast beef always sliced so thin. Nothing beats top round for a good\par
old-fashioned roast beef sandwich because it doesn\rquote t have any gristle or fat \f2\emdash\f1\par
just good, beefy flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
When I was in Ireland, I swilled Guinness [stout] and ate bangers and mash,\par
which was essentially sausage with caramelized onions on top. It was so good\par
that when I came back to the U.S., I started experimenting with Guinness. That\rquote s\par
how I came up with a dish of braised short ribs that had been marinated in\par
Guinness. The problem you often have cooking with beer is that sometimes the\par
dish gets bitter. So, to counteract that naturally without using sugar, I choose to\par
use onions. I marinate the ribs in the beer, then braise them, and finish the dish\par
with a puree of roasted onions for balance.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
BEER\par
Taste: varies, from bitter to sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
beef\par
cheese, cheddar\par
ham\par
marinades\par
meats\par
onions\par
pork\par
sauces\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
shrimp\par
stews\par
BEETS\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, carpaccio, chips, roast, soup, steam\par
apples\par
arugula\par
avocado\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
beef\par
beet greens\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
cabbage\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
caviar\par
celery\par
CHEESE: blue, cambozola, cheddar, GOAT, PARMESAN,\par
ROQUEFORT, SALTY\par
chervil\par
chicory\par
chiles\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
citrus\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
endive\par
escarole\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
fris\'e9e\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
herbs\par
honey\par
herring\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon balm\par
lemon thyme\par
lemon verbena\par
lime\par
maple syrup\par
milk\par
mint\par
mushrooms (e.g., shiitake)\par
MUSTARD, DIJON\par
mustard oil\par
nutmeg\par
oil: canola, peanut, vegetable, walnut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, esp. ni\'e7oise\par
onions: red, white, yellow\par
ORANGE: JUICE, ZEST\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pears\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
pistachios\par
potatoes\par
radishes\par
rosemary\par
Russian cuisine\par
salads, esp. green\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
SHALLOTS\par
sherry\par
soups, esp. borscht\par
sour cream\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, veal, vegetable\par
sugar: brown, white\par
TARRAGON\par
thyme\par
vinaigrette, mustard\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, cider, raspberry, red wine, sherry,\par
tarragon, white wine\par
vodka\par
WALNUTS AND WALNUT OIL\par
wine, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beets + chives + orange + tarragon\par
beets + citrus + goat cheese + olive oil + shallots\par
beets + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + orange + tarragon\par
beets + dill + sour cream\par
beets + endive + goat cheese + pistachios\par
beets + endive + orange + walnuts\par
beets + goat cheese + walnuts\par
beets + Gorgonzola cheese + hazelnuts + vinegar\par
beets + honey + tarragon\par
beets + mint + yogurt\par
beets + olive oil + Parmesan cheese + balsamic vinegar\par
beets + orange + walnuts\par
beets + potatoes + balsamic vinegar\par
beets + shallots + vinegar + walnuts\par
Beets are especially delicious when accented by a salty cheese, whether queso\par
fresco or ricotta salata.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
People love fresh beets. Now I won\rquote t lay claim to inventing beet salad with\par
Gorgonzola and hazelnuts, but how our version is different from many others is\par
that we marinate the beets. Overnight, we\rquote ll marinate peeled beets in Barolo\par
vinegar, shallots, olive oil, salt, and pepper. Using Russian and Polish cooking\par
principles, marinating the beets ensures that the vinegar is able to penetrate them\par
so that they are sure to be tangy.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I wanted to take beets that are associated with winter and make them into\par
something summery, so I used them for a ceviche. We roasted and pureed them\par
with lime and froze them into a sorbet. We served the beet sorbet flat in a bowl\par
so it looked like soup. From there, we layered thinly sliced raw bay scallops with\par
segments of lime, cilantro, and red onion oil. The dish is very fresh tasting. The\par
other key to this dish was that we had all the flavors of ceviche but did not\par
marinate the scallops in the acid, which makes them rubbery. The scallops\par
treated this way are more delicate, like sushi.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Roasted Beet Tartare with Chianti Vinegar and Ricotta Salata \f2\emdash\f1  Mario\par
Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Roasted Beet Salad: Cabrales Blue Cheese, Endive, and Walnuts \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud/Bertrand Chemel, Caf\'e9 Boulud (New York City) Roasted Beet Salad\par
with Hazelnut, Gorgonzola, Barolo Vinegar \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew Carmellini, A Voce\par
(New York City)\par
Squab Borscht with Root Vegetable Pierogi \f2\emdash\f1  Sandy D\rquote Amato, Sanford\par
(Milwaukee)\par
Roasted Beet Salad with a Warm Farm Egg, Caciocavallo Cheese, and\par
Pickled Spring Onions \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Roasted Beet Salad with Shaved Fennel and Ch\'e8vre \f2\emdash\f1  Leslie Mackie,\par
Macrina Bakery & Caf\'e9 (Seattle)\par
Salad of Organic Beets and Gala Apples, \ldblquote Beauty Heart\rdblquote  Radishes and\par
Upland Cress, Cracked Hazelnuts, Great Hill Blue Cheese, and Quince\par
\ldblquote Must\rdblquote  Syrup \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Tartare of Yellow Beets with Sturgeon Caviar, and Dashi \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi,\par
Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Beets, Fris\'e9e, Cambazola, Candied Walnuts, Orange Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope,\par
T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Beet, Apple, and Goat Cheese Tartlet with a Hazelnut-Champagne Dressing\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
We serve a salad that showcases the classic combination of beets, walnuts, and\par
orange. We boil our beets, then slice them thinly on the plate. We add fris\'e9e to\par
the salad and, since it is bitter, we mix in Cambozola cheese and candied\par
walnuts. We dress the salad with a sherry-walnut-tarragon vinaigrette, and a\par
mandarin orange sauce. People are surprised when they eat the dish \f2\emdash\f1  first,\par
because they find out they like beets, and second, because the fris\'e9e is not bitter\par
after being softened by the sweet touches.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
I like to intensify the flavor of beets by serving them prepared in different ways\par
on the same dish, such as accenting roasted beets with crunchy beet chips and a\par
spiced beet coulis. And I love anything anise-flavored with beets, whether fennel\par
or anise itself.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE, ARIZONA)\par
BELGIAN CUISINE\par
almonds\par
beef\par
beer\par
Brussels sprouts\par
charcuterie\par
chocolate\par
endive, Belgian\par
game\par
meats\par
mussels, steamed\par
mustard\par
POTATOES: FRIED, mashed\par
shallots\par
soups\par
stews\par
vinegar\par
waffles\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beef + bay leaf + beer + thyme + vinegar\par
endive + b\'e9chamel sauce + nutmeg\par
endive + goat cheese + herbs\par
mussels + butter + garlic + parsley + shallots\par
BELL PEPPERS\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: bitter to sweet, from unripe (green) to ripe (yellow to red)\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9, steam, stew, stir-fry, stuff\par
anchovies\par
anise\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
BASIL\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
butter\par
The sweetness of red bell peppers and the acidity of sherry vinegar make for a\par
perfect combination.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
A lot of people find the skin a turnoff on green bell peppers, so I\rquote ll peel them\par
and cook them, which releases their juice. They\rquote re great cooked down with\par
chorizo, garlic, and onions, which you can serve with shrimp over rice.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I\rquote ll cook red bell peppers with onion and garlic on the stove over a l ow heat for\par
six hours or more, so that they become caramelized and intense. The bell\par
peppers eventually turn into a concentrated red pepper paste. If you have a dish\par
where something is missing, add a little of this and it will fix it! It is superb. I\par
add it to all sorts of things \f2\emdash\f1  even pasta.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Green bell peppers are used for the equivalent of Spanish mirepoix. In Spain\par
you don\rquote t see much celery \f2\emdash\f1  but you\rquote ll see green pepper, onion, garlic, and\par
leeks.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
capers, esp. with roasted peppers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE, esp. feta, Fontina, goat, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chile peppers (e.g., fresh green or poblano)\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
game birds\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
goulash\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms (e.g., shiitake)\par
mustard\par
OIL, CANOLA\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives (e.g., green)\par
ONIONS, ESP. RED OR YELLOW\par
oregano\par
paprika, smoked\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
peppers, piquillo\par
pine nuts\par
pizza\par
polenta\par
pork\par
potatoes (e.g., red)\par
quail\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salads\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sausages (e.g., chorizo, Italian)\par
savory\par
scallions\par
sea bass\par
sesame oil\par
shallots\par
squash, esp. summer\par
stews\par
stir-fried dishes\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar (pinch)\par
swordfish\par
Tabasco sauce\par
THYME\par
TOMATOES\par
tuna\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
watercress\par
wine: dry white, sweet sherry\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bell peppers + basil + currants + garlic + pine nuts + sherry vinegar\par
bell peppers + garlic + olive oil + onion + thyme + zucchini\par
Dishes\par
Berry Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche Poppy Seed Cake\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Fresh Fruit: Black Garnet Cherries, Strawberries, Pistachios, Marshall\par
Farms Honey, Straus Organic Whole Milk Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry\par
chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Red Berry\f2\endash\f1 White Chocolate Trifles\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
BERRIES \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also Raspberries, Strawberries,\par
etc.)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: poach, raw\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chocolate: dark, milk, white\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me de cassis\par
cr\'e8me de menthe\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
elderflower syrup\par
game\par
honey, wildflower\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
mint\par
pepper, black\par
poppy seeds\par
salads, fruit\par
sour cream\par
sugar: brown, white\par
yogurt\par
BITTER DISHES (e.g., greens, barbecue food)\par
Tips: Salt suppresses bitterness.\par
BITTERNESS\par
Taste: bitter\par
Function: cooling; stimulates appetite; promotes other tastes\par
Tips: Bitterness relieves thirst.\par
When a bitter component is added to a dish, it creates a sense of lightness.\par
The hotter the food or drink, the less the perception of bitterness.\par
arugula\par
baking powder\par
baking soda\par
beans, lima\par
beer, esp. hoppy (e.g., bitter ales)\par
bell peppers, green\par
bitters\par
broccoli rabe\par
Brussels sprouts\par
cabbage, green\par
caffeine (e.g., as in coffee, tea)\par
chard (e.g., Swiss chard)\par
chicory\par
chocolate, dark\par
cocoa\par
coffee\par
cranberries\par
eggplant\par
endive\par
escarole\par
fenugreek\par
fris\'e9e\par
grapefruit (bitter-sour)\par
greens: bitter, dark leafy (e.g., beet, dandelion, mustard, turnip)\par
herbs, many\par
horseradish\par
kale\par
lettuce, romaine\par
So many Western cultures don\rquote t incorporate bitterness into their food. In India\par
and Asia, it is a component of a balanced dish. If you give most of America rice\par
with lime pickle, they will not be thrilled. It will be too sour, bitter, and spicy. To\par
introduce the bitter flavor of lime pickle, we will puree it with yogurt and use it\par
for a marinade for whole prawns. That way, it isn\rquote t overwhelming.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I used to love dishes that were rich on rich \f2\emdash\f1  but the older I get, the more I look\par
forward to that bitterness, the cleansing bite that makes you want to go back for\par
your next forkful of a dish. Almost every dish in our kitchen is finished with\par
some kind of bitter leaf to serve as a balancing component. That\rquote s why I serve\par
cress or watercress with a steak and potato dish, and arugula with our seared\par
bluefin tuna on braised veal cheeks, and a bed of bitter greens like watercress,\par
fris\'e9e, arugula, and shaved endive as the base for our foie gras dish \f2\emdash\f1  to cut the\par
richness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, York Street (Dallas)\par
liver, calf\rquote s\par
melon, bitter\par
olives (bitter-salty)\par
radicchio\par
rhubarb\par
spices, many\par
spinach\par
tea\par
tonic water\par
turmeric\par
walnuts, esp. black\par
watercress\par
wine, red, esp. tannic\par
zest: lemon, orange, etc.\par
zucchini\par
BLACKBERRIES\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: cooked, raw\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cheese, goat\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cobblers\par
Cointreau\par
cornmeal\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me de cassis\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
custard\par
ginger\par
Grand Marnier\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, berry\par
mango\par
mascarpone\par
melons\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
oats\par
oranges\par
peaches\par
pies\par
pork\par
raspberries\par
salads, fruit\par
salt (pinch)\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
vanilla\par
watermelon\par
wine (e.g., Merlot)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
blackberries + cr\'e8me de cassis + sugar\par
blackberries + ginger + peaches\par
blackberries + honey + vanilla + yogurt\par
Blackberries are only okay raw, but they are really great cooked.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Blackberry-Almond Tart with Pineapple Carpaccio, Asian Pear, GingerLime Caramel, and Beurre Noisette Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry\par
chef, Le Bernardin (New York City) Candied Ginger Shortbread Stacks with\par
Peach-Blackberry Compote \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San\par
Francisco)\par
Blackberry Sorbet\f2\endash\f1 Filled Peaches\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
BLACK-EYED PEAS\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: simmer\par
African cuisine\par
bay leaf\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chile peppers, dried red\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
GREENS (e.g., collard)\par
HAM HOCKS\par
Indian cuisine\par
oil, peanut\par
onions: red, yellow\par
pepper, black\par
pork\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
salt\par
savory\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vinegar, white wine\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
black-eyed peas + collard greens + ham hocks\par
black-eyed peas + rice + savory\par
BLACK PEPPER (See Pepper, Black)\par
BLUEBERRIES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Botanical relatives: huckleberries\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: cooked, raw\par
Tips: Can substitute huckleberries.\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
blackberries\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
chocolate, white\par
CINNAMON\par
cinnamon basil\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
cornmeal\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
custard\par
ginger\par
honey\par
jams\par
Kirsch\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon thyme\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liqueurs: berry, orange\par
mace\par
mangoes\par
MAPLE SYRUP\par
MASCARPONE\par
melon\par
mint\par
molasses\par
muffins\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oats and oatmeal\par
orange\par
PEACHES\par
pears\par
pecans\par
Cinnamon with blueberries really intensifies the flavor of the blueberries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
If I make a blueberry cobbler, I will macerate the blueberries first with maple\par
and lemon zest.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Blueberries and lemon go really well together. Blueberries are a thick fruit with\par
a lot of pectin in them, and intensely flavored. You need some lemon to cut\par
through that.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Dishes\par
Risotto Fritters with Gingered Blueberries \f2\emdash\f1  Jimmy Bradley, The Red Cat\par
(New York City)\par
Warm Blueberry Crostata with Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche and Cinnamon \f2\emdash\f1  Gina\par
DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Blueberry-Apple-Lavender Faux Gelato and Anise Tuile \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and\par
Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
port\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
ricotta cheese\par
rum\par
salads, fruit\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
tarts\par
Triple Sec\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
watermelon\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
blueberries + cinnamon + cream + sugar\par
blueberries + cream + lemon zest + mascarpone + sugar\par
blueberries + honey + port + vanilla\par
blueberries + lemon + lemon thyme\par
blueberries + lemon zest + maple syrup\par
blueberries + mascarpone + peaches\par
BLUEFISH\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: bake, blacken, braise, broil, grill, pan roast, poach, saut\'e9\par
chile peppers, chipotle\par
cilantro\par
lemon\par
lime, juice\par
marjoram\par
mustard, brown\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
rosemary\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, cider\par
wine\par
BOK CHOY\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: boil, braise, raw, stir-fry\par
asparagus\par
beef\par
broccoli\par
butter\par
carrots\par
cashews\par
celery\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
cilantro\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
duck\par
fennel\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hot sauce\par
lemon, juice\par
meats\par
mirin\par
mushrooms, esp. shiitake\par
noodles, rice\par
oil: peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
peanuts\par
pork\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salads\par
salmon\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
snow peas\par
soy sauce\par
tamari\par
tarragon\par
tofu\par
vinegar, esp. rice\par
water chestnuts\par
zucchini\par
BONITO FLAKES, DRIED (See also Tuna)\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Use large flakes to make fish stock and small flakes to season dishes.\par
anchovies\par
capers\par
garlic\par
Japanese cuisine\par
oil, vegetable\par
scallions\par
stock, fish\par
vinegar\par
BOUQUET GARNI\par
Tips: Bundle of herbs is removed after cooking.\par
French cuisine\par
soups\par
stews\par
stocks\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bay leaf + parsley + thyme\par
BOURBON (See also Whiskey)\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
apple juice\par
apricot brandy\par
barbecue\par
bitters\par
butter\par
butterscotch\par
cream\par
desserts\par
ginger\par
grapefruit juice\par
grenadine\par
honey\par
ice cream\par
LEMON JUICE\par
mint\par
orange juice\par
peaches\par
pecans\par
pineapple juice\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
vermouth: dry, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bourbon + grapefruit + honey\par
bourbon + lemon + peaches\par
bourbon + lemon + sugar\par
bourbon + pineapple + sugar\par
BOYSENBERRIES\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
cream\par
Kirsch\par
lemon, juice\par
nectarines\par
peaches\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
wine, esp. dry red\par
BRAISED DISHES\par
Season: winter\par
Tips: Check here for ideas of meats or vegetables to add to a braised dish.\par
artichokes\par
beans\par
beef: brisket, shanks, short ribs, shoulder\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
celery\par
chicken: legs, thighs, wings\par
chili\par
cod\par
corned beef and cabbage\par
duck, legs\par
endive\par
fennel\par
ham hocks\par
lamb: shanks, shoulder\par
monkfish\par
octopus\par
onions\par
oxtails\par
pork: belly, butt, chops, loin, ribs, shank, shoulder\par
potatoes\par
pot roast\par
rabbit\par
ratatouille\par
short ribs\par
skate\par
stews\par
tripe\par
turkey, legs\par
turnips\par
veal: breast, rump, shank, shoulder, sirloin, sweetbreads\par
vegetables, root\par
venison, shoulder\par
BRAZILIAN CUISINE (See also Latin American Cuisine)\par
beans, black\par
cardamom\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens: collard, kale\par
grilled dishes\par
meats\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
peppers\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
rice\par
saffron\par
sausages\par
thyme\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cream + egg yolks + sugar\par
pork + beans + greens + onions + oranges\par
BRINED DISHES\par
Taste: salty\par
Tips: Brining meats (i.e., in salt water) before cooking increases their\par
moistness, juiciness, and flavor.\par
chicken\par
game birds\par
pork\par
poultry\par
turkey\par
I don\rquote t brine automatically. If I have a chicken that I know will cook up on the\par
dry side, then I will brine it first. If it is a great chicken that will cook up\par
naturally juicy and doesn\rquote t need help, then I won\rquote t. You can make a pretty strong\par
brine for squab or even chicken \f2\emdash\f1  for instance, with thyme or even chile pepper\par
\f2\emdash\f1  and the meat will pick up some flavors, but it\rquote s still very subtle.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
BROCCOLI\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Botanical relatives: Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, collard greens,\par
kale, kohlrabi\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, deep-fry, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
basil\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
CHEESE: cheddar, feta, goat, mozzarella, Parmesan, Swiss\par
chicken\par
chile peppers (esp. green)\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cream\par
curry and curry leaf\par
eggs\par
garlic\par
ginger, esp. fresh\par
hollandaise sauce\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon balm\par
mint\par
mustard and mustard seeds\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, esp. green\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pepper, ground\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice, basmati\par
salt\par
scallions\par
Our winter pistou features broccoli, and we\rquote re able to make the broccoli flavor\par
very intense. We use not only broccoli stock, but also broccoli florets and even\par
add broccoli puree. There\rquote s both clarity and lightness of flavor that we\rquote re able to\par
achieve without butter or cream this way.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAN BARBER, BLUE HILL AT STONE BARNS (POCANTICO HILLS, NEW YORK)\par
shallots\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
broccoli + anchovies + capers + red pepper flakes + garlic + olives\par
broccoli + anchovies + lemon\par
broccoli + garlic + lemon juice + olive oil\par
broccoli + garlic + tarragon\par
BROCCOLINI\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: blanch, raw, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
basil\par
cheese: feta, Parmesan\par
garlic\par
lemon, juice\par
olive oil\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
red pepper flakes\par
salads\par
sesame oil\par
soups\par
tomatoes\par
BROCCOLI RABE\par
Season: late fall\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
basil\par
beans, white\par
butter, unsalted\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chiles\par
chives\par
cream\par
fish\par
GARLIC\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
meats\par
OLIVE OIL\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta, esp. orecchiette\par
pepper: white, black\par
piquillo peppers\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt\par
sausage\par
stock, chicken\par
tomatoes\par
Dishes\par
Orecchiette with Rapini and Sweet Sausage \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New\par
York City)\par
Broccoli Rabe with Garlic and Oregano\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
broccoli rabe + anchovies + red pepper flakes + garlic + olive oil\par
broccoli rabe + garlic + oregano\par
broccoli rabe + red pepper flakes + oregano\par
BRUNCH\par
Customers are picky at brunch. They have all cooked what they think they like,\par
they think they can do it slightly better than we can, and they want it twice as\par
fast. So, we take the classics like pancakes or French toast, use them as building\par
blocks, and push them a little further.\par
We will offer seasonal pancakes. In the winter, we\rquote ll make buckwheat\par
pancakes with cinnamon and glazed oranges. Bridging spring into summer, we\rquote ll\par
offer corn and saffron pancakes with a spicy poached pear and fresh ricotta.\par
Saffron and corn work really well together because of the floral nature of the\par
saffron and sweetness of the corn. We will use poached pears on the pancakes\par
until switching to blueberries for the summer, which give a real pop. The pears\par
are poached in a red wine syrup with aleppo chile that is a sun-dried chile with a\par
rich, round, sweet spice to it. The chile is not noticeable, but it acts like an acid\par
by lightening, plus cutting the sugar and richness of, the pancake.\par
When people eat pancakes, they naturally reach for butter. I don\rquote t serve butter\par
with my pancakes and instead serve fresh ricotta. We use ricotta from Anne\par
Saxelby, who supplies us with a fresh, rich, velvety ricotta, and this gives a\par
richness to the dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
BRUSSELS SPROUTS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: bitter\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, collard greens, kale,\par
kohlrabi\par
Weight: moderate\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, saut\'e9, simmer, steam, stew, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
apple cider\par
apples and apple juice or cider\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
BACON\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
celery\par
celery root\par
CHEESE: blue, cheddar, goat, Parmesan, provolone, ricotta, Swiss\par
chestnuts\par
chives\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
juniper berries\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
oil, mustard\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes, esp. mashed\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sauces, b\'e9chamel\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
thyme, fresh\par
turnips\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: cider, white wine\par
water chestnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Brussels sprouts + bacon + garlic + cider vinegar\par
Brussels sprouts + bacon + onions\par
Brussels sprouts + cream + nutmeg\par
Brussels sprouts + lemon juice + thyme\par
Brussels sprouts + pancetta + thyme\par
BULGUR WHEAT\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: steam\par
butter\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
dill\par
fish (e.g., branzino, pike, striped bass)\par
Dishes\par
Brussels Sprouts, Cranberry Polenta, and Braised Fennel with a Moroccan\par
Olive Relish \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
I love bulgur [wheat] salad. In the summer, I\rquote ll serve it with greens and\par
tomatoes, while in the fall it\rquote s paired with tangerines and pomegranates. I feel\par
the same about it whether it is under branzino or pike or striped bass; it always\par
makes sense.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
greens\par
lamb\par
lentils\par
meats\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
oils, walnut\par
olive oil\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pilaf (key ingredient)\par
pine nuts\par
pomegranates\par
rice\par
salads\par
soups\par
tabbouleh (key ingredient)\par
tangerine\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
BUTTER, BROWN (aka Beurre Noisette)\par
bananas\par
fish, esp. white: halibut, skate\par
fruits, esp. richer ones\par
nuts\par
pears\par
scallops\par
soft-shell crabs\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic\par
Flavor Affinities\par
brown butter + balsamic vinegar + fish\par
brown butter + banana + nuts\par
BUTTERMILK\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
bananas\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
cherries\par
cinnamon\par
dates\par
ginger\par
herbs\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime\par
maple syrup\par
mayonnaise\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
orange\par
peaches\par
plums\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
sugar, brown\par
walnuts\par
BUTTERSCOTCH\par
almonds\par
chocolate\par
coffee\par
lemon\par
praline\par
rum\par
vanilla\par
Dishes\par
Butterscotch-Praline Ice Cream Parfait\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Rebecca Charles, Pearl Oyster Bar (New York City)\par
One of my favorite flavors in the world is brown butter. A financier cake made\par
with brown butter is one of the best things ever. I have been making a brown\par
butter vinaigrette for a jillion years! It is a super-easy pan sauce that I love as a\par
warm sauce: I just brown my butter in a pan until it gets the noisette [brown]\par
color, then add some balsamic vinegar. It doesn\rquote t even need to be expensive\par
balsamic. You make an emulsification in the pan, and add a little salt and pepper\par
and it\rquote s done. The flavor of brown butter, salt, and acid is one of my favorites. It\par
works well on different fish like scallops or halibut or soft-shell crabs.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Brown butter is one of my favorite flavors, and it pairs well with anything\par
nutty, as well as richer fruits like bananas. A classic French financier is handsdown one of my favorite French pastries [a cookie made with brown butter, egg\par
whites, flour, and powdered sugar].\par
Butter tastes great on its own, and in making brown butter you are not adding\par
anything to it \f2\emdash\f1  just transforming it, so that it becomes more. The process is\par
simple but a little tricky, as it keeps cooking even after it is off the stove.\par
Something you can do to improve it is \f2\emdash\f1  halfway through the cooking process\par
\f2\emdash\f1  start whisking the butter, because it intensifies the flavor if you keep the\par
particles suspended.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\f0\par
CABBAGE \f3\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, collard greens,\par
kale, kohlrabi\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, braise, raw, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
apples and apple cider\par
BACON\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bell peppers, red\par
butter, unsalted\par
CARAWAY SEEDS\par
carrots\par
celery: leaves, salt, seeds\par
Champagne\par
cheese: cheddar, feta, goat, Parmesan, Swiss, Taleggio, Teleme\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chili sauce\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
cilantro\par
clove\par
coconut\par
coleslaw (key ingredient)\par
coriander\par
corned beef\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry leaves\par
dill\par
duck\par
fat: rendered chicken, duck\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Cabbage often has the connotation of being heavy, but in the fall, we\rquote ll make a\par
fine chiffonade of cabbage that\rquote s very light. I like to cut cabbage thin and roast it\par
in a pan so that the edges just get brown because that tastes really good. We\par
figured that out by mistake by putting cabbage into too hot a pan. After the chef\par
raised his voice about how that is the wrong way to cook cabbage, we tasted it,\par
and it was good! We now serve a green cabbage dish cooked this way with\par
caraway seeds and walnuts, then deglazed with Calvados. We also add a little\par
cider vinegar and olive oil to finish. It is a nice, easy marriage. It is not an\par
unpredictable marriage; these things just all work together. We pair this with\par
braised pork belly, but it would also work with a roasted breast of squab with its\par
leg done in a confit.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
ham\par
horseradish\par
jicama\par
juniper berries\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
meats\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, esp. Dijon, dry\par
mustard oil\par
mustard seeds, black\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
ONIONS, ESP. RED\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
poppy seeds\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
savory\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR: champagne, cider, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine, white (e.g., Riesling)\par
CABBAGE, NAPA (aka Chinese cabbage)\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, braise, grill, marinate (e.g., kimchee), raw, saut\'e9, stew,\par
stir-fry\par
carrots\par
cashews\par
chicken\par
I like coming up with spins using Asian ingredients \f2\emdash\f1  such as soaking napa\par
cabbage in ice water to crisp it and serving it with a blue cheese dressing as if it\par
were iceberg lettuce.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
Chinese cuisine\par
cilantro\par
coleslaw, Asian-style\par
cucumber\par
duck\par
fish, salmon\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
mint\par
mushrooms (e.g., shiitakes)\par
oil, sesame\par
orange, juice\par
pork\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
sesame seeds\par
scallops\par
shellfish: shrimp\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
stir-fries\par
Thai basil\par
tofu\par
vinegar, rice\par
wine, rice\par
CABBAGE, RED\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Techniques: braise, marinate, raw\par
APPLES: Golden Delicious, Rome, tart\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
butter, unsalted\par
caraway seeds\par
cheese: blue, goat, Gorgonzola, ricotta salata\par
Dishes\par
Pommery Grain Mustard Ice Cream, Red Cabbage Gazpacho \f2\emdash\f1  Heston\par
Blumenthal, The Fat Duck (England)\par
Dishes\par
Saut\'e9ed Strawberries in Black Pepper\f2\endash\f1 Cabernet Sauvignon Sauce with\par
Vanilla Bean Ice Cream and Sacristan Cookie \f2\emdash\f1  Lissa Doumani and Hiro\par
Sone, Terra (St. Helena, California)\par
chestnuts\par
cider, apple\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
cumin\par
fat: duck, goose\par
fruit, tart\par
game: rabbit, venison\par
game birds, pheasant\par
garlic\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
meats\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions: red, white\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
poultry\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt, kosher\par
scallions\par
stock, chicken\par
SUGAR: BROWN, WHITE\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine, dry red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
red cabbage + apples + cider vinegar\par
red cabbage + bacon + blue cheese + walnuts\par
red cabbage + balsamic vinegar + brown sugar\par
red cabbage + chestnuts + pork\par
red cabbage + duck fat + goat cheese + red wine vinegar\par
red cabbage + pancetta + ricotta salata cheese\par
CABBAGE, SAVOY\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Techniques: boil, braise, raw, roast, steam\par
apples\par
bacon\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
raisins, golden\par
salt, kosher\par
stock\par
thyme\par
turnips\par
vinegar, cider\par
walnuts\par
CABERNET SAUVIGNON\par
Weight: heavy red wine\par
Volume: loud\par
beef\par
cheese, esp. aged, blue, and/or stinky\par
game\par
game birds\par
lamb\par
meat, red\par
pepper, black\par
steak\par
strawberries\par
CAJUN CUISINE\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chiles\par
crayfish\par
gumbo\par
jambalaya\par
onions\par
peppers\par
rice\par
seafood\par
tomatoes\par
CALAMARI (See Squid)\par
CALF\rquote S LIVER (See Liver, Calf\rquote s)\par
CALVADOS\par
Season: winter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Generally an after-dinner drink.\par
apples\par
bitters, orange\par
French cuisine\par
gin\par
lemon, juice\par
orange, juice\par
pears\par
rum\par
sugar\par
vermouth, sweet\par
CANADIAN CUISINE\par
bacon, back (aka Canadian bacon)\par
beer\par
berries, esp. wild\par
cheese\par
duck\par
fiddlehead ferns\par
foie gras\par
game\par
game birds\par
maple syrup\par
meats, esp. smoked\par
mushrooms, wild\par
oysters\par
rabbit\par
salmon\par
seafood\par
wild rice\par
wine: ice wine, Riesling\par
CANTALOUPE\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
basil\par
cilantro\par
curry powder\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
melon: honeydew, watermelon\par
Dishes\par
Cantaloupe \ldblquote Sashimi,\rdblquote  Raspberry Gel, and Star Anise Dust \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique\par
and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
mint\par
pepper: black, white\par
port\par
raspberries\par
star anise\par
tarragon\par
wine, esp. sweet\par
wine, Pinot Blanc (to accompany)\par
yogurt\par
CANTONESE CUISINE (See Chinese Cuisine)\par
CAPERS\par
Taste: salty, sour, pungent\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
butter sauces\par
celery\par
chicken\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fish\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lime\par
marjoram\par
meats, esp. richer ones, e.g., rib eye steaks\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mustard\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parlsey, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
salads\par
salmon\par
sauces, esp. Italian cuisine\par
shellfish, e.g., scallops, shrimp\par
tapenade (key ingredient)\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
capers + lemon + marjoram\par
CARAMEL\par
Taste: sweet\par
almonds\par
APPLES\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
bourbon\par
cherries\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
coffee and espresso\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cumin\par
custard\par
fruits, tropical\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
nutmeg\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
plums\par
raisins\par
rhubarb\par
rum\par
sesame seeds\par
VANILLA\par
CARAWAY SEEDS\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: medium\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add late in the cooking process.\par
apples\par
Austrian cuisine\par
beef stew\par
BREADS, esp. pumpernickel, rye\par
British cuisine\par
cabbage\par
cakes\par
carrots\par
cheese (e.g., Liptauer, Muenster)\par
coleslaw\par
cookies\par
coriander\par
corned beef\par
cumin\par
desserts\par
duck\par
Eastern European cuisine\par
fruit\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
goose\par
goulash\par
Hungarian cuisine\par
juniper berries\par
lavender (can substitute for caraway)\par
marinades\par
meats\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
noodles\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
soups\par
stews\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turnips\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
CARDAMOM\par
Taste: sweet, pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add early when cooking.\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots\par
Asian cuisine\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, cakes, cookies)\par
bananas\par
beef\par
beverages, esp. hot\par
caraway\par
carrots\par
chicken, esp. stewed\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
coriander\par
cream and ice cream\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cumin\par
curries\par
custards\par
dates\par
desserts, esp. Indian\par
duck, esp. roasted\par
fish, e.g., salmon\par
garam masala, Indian (key ingredient)\par
ginger\par
gingerbread\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lamb\par
legumes\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lentils\par
lime\par
meats\par
North African cuisine\par
orange: juice, zest\par
paprika\par
parsnips\par
pastries\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper\par
pistachios\par
pork\par
rice and rice dishes\par
saffron\par
salmon\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
squash\par
stews\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, root\par
walnuts\par
wine (e.g., mulled)\par
yogurt\par
CARIBBEAN CUISINES\par
allspice\par
bay leaf\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
curry\par
dill\par
fish\par
fruits, tropical\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hot sauce\par
jerked dishes\par
lime, juice\par
molasses\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pineapple\par
plantains\par
rum, esp. dark\par
shellfish\par
sugar, brown\par
tamarind\par
thyme\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cilantro + garlic + onions (aka sofrito)\par
fish + allspice + oil + onions + vinegar (aka escab\'e8che)\par
CARROTS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Botanical relatives: celery, chervil, dill, fennel, parsley, parsnips\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: boil, braise, grill, raw, roast, saut\'e9, simmer, steam, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise hyssop\par
apple juice\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
brandy\par
butter, brown\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
carrot juice\par
celery\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
Thumbelina carrots are something I missed when I moved from working in the\par
country [i.e., Pocantico Hills, New York, where Blue Hill at Stone Barns is\par
located] into Manhattan. Luckily, I recently found these short, fat carrots at the\par
green market. We saut\'e9 these carrots over an open fire so that they get a little\par
smoky. When they are cooked, they become soft and creamy. Once cooked, we\par
turn them into a puree with a shot of carrot juice at the last second. We pair this\par
with farro that has been cooked like risotto, then add some pine nuts and more\par
Thumbelina carrots that have been quartered. I don\rquote t know what is more\par
seductive: the smooth carrot farro with its light carrot flavor or the carrots\par
themselves that are totally creamy. The dish has no butter or cream but that is not\par
because we are trying to be healthy. The dish just doesn\rquote t need it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Juices are a great way to freshen up a dish. If you cook a carrot, you lose the\par
\ldblquote carrotiness\rdblquote  of it. If you make a carrot soup with cooked carrots, it doesn\rquote t\par
become bright. So now we do a carrot base with cooked organic carrots with\par
tops, onions, garlic, and maybe some ginger and lemongrass. With that base we\par
make a really thick soup and then add carrot juice to it. In the end you have fresh\par
and cooked carrots for a better flavor profile.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I had a salad at a restaurant with grated carrots and tarragon leaves with\par
pistachios \f2\emdash\f1  and I knew the minute I tasted it that I could adapt this salad to be\par
my own. Instead of grating the carrots, I cut them on the bias and roasted them\par
with a little ginger and juca [an African mix made of almonds, pistachios,\par
hazelnuts, and spices]. To finish the salad, I added the whole tarragon leaves,\par
great pistachio oil, and a raita of yogurt and golden raisins. The dish has\par
wonderful colors and texture and those beautiful whole leaves of tarragon which\par
I had never thought to do myself.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
Carrots \f2\emdash\f1  which pair well with allspice, cinnamon, cloves, and cumin \f2\emdash\f1  are\par
one of the few vegetables that shine in desserts. When I first came to the U.S. I\par
discovered carrot cake and that you could use carrots for dessert. I have since\par
made carrot ice cream, cookies, and fruit paste. The problem is that most people\par
trust carrot cake but little else. When I am using carrots for dessert, I like to cook\par
them with orange.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Carrots and parsnips are similar, and I like the depth of flavor that comes from\par
combining them.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE, ARIZONA)\par
Dishes\par
Carrot Cake with Peach-Ginger Cream and Saskatoon Berry Compote \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Carrot Cake with Vanilla Chantilly, Pecan Praline \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry\par
chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Roasted Carrots and Minted Pea Puree, and Moscato Vinegar \f2\emdash\f1  Cory\par
Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cod\par
coriander\par
crayfish\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
curry\par
curry leaves\par
dill\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
garlic\par
GINGER\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
LEMON, juice\par
lemon balm\par
lemon verbena\par
lime, juice (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
lovage\par
mace\par
MAPLE SYRUP\par
mint: spearmint, peppermint\par
mirepoix (key ingredient)\par
mustard\par
mustard seeds, black\par
nutmeg\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. green\par
ORANGE, juice\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pistachios\par
potatoes\par
raisins: black, white\par
meats, roasted\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
sage\par
salsify\par
salt: fleur de sel, kosher\par
savory\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
SUGAR: brown, white (pinch)\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
turnips\par
veal\par
vegetables, root\par
vinaigrette\par
walnuts\par
wine, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
carrots + celery + onions (aka mirepoix)\par
carrots + cilantro + lime\par
carrots + cinnamon + raisins + sugar + walnuts\par
carrots + cumin + orange\par
carrots + dill + orange\par
carrots + lemon juice + olive oil + parsley\par
carrots + maple syrup + orange\par
carrots + olive oil + turnips\par
carrots + pistachios + tarragon\par
carrots + raisins + yogurt\par
CASHEWS\par
Taste: sweet, rich\par
Function: warming\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
caramel\par
cheese\par
chicken (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
chocolate, esp. white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
coffee / espresso\par
curries\par
dates\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
guava\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
kiwi fruit\par
lemon\par
macadamia nuts\par
mango\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
oil, vegetable\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
persimmon\par
pineapple\par
rice\par
rum\par
salads\par
salt\par
sauces\par
sugar: brown, white\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, esp. Indian\par
CATFISH\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
avocados\par
bacon\par
basil\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage (e.g., coleslaw)\par
capers\par
cayenne\par
chile peppers, chipotle\par
cilantro\par
cucumbers\par
garlic\par
greens, collard\par
ham\par
hush puppies\par
lemon, juice\par
oil: peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. ni\'e7oise\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, Szechuan\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
salt, kosher\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tomatillos\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, cider\par
wine, dry white\par
CAULIFLOWER\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: astringent\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, collard greens,\par
kale, kohlrabi\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, braise, deep-fry, gratin, puree, raw, roast, saut\'e9, simmer,\par
steam\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, esp. green (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
bread crumbs\par
broccoli\par
brown butter\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
caviar\par
celery seeds\par
CHEESE: blue, cheddar, Comt\'e9, Emmental, goat, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan,\par
pecorino\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, dried red\par
chili sauce\par
chives\par
Dishes\par
Variation of Cauliflower with Raisins, Grenobloise Butter, and Fried\par
Pantelleria Capers \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Cauliflower Panna Cotta Topped with American Paddlefish Caviar and\par
Cockle Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
Cauliflower Rice Pilaf with Raita\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
The first time I had the combination of cauliflower and curry was when I\par
worked with Daniel Boulud, and he used them together in a soup. I didn\rquote t grow\par
up liking cauliflower, but I do now when it\rquote s well roasted or pureed. It has good\par
water content, which makes for a very smooth puree, and it has a subtle yet\par
distinct flavor. Apple combines well with both, as it adds acidity and crunch\par
while cutting the stronger flavors.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
Our dish of spicy roasted cauliflower with pine nuts and lime is cauliflower with\par
lime supremes [skinless lime sections]. I love lime because it has more character\par
than lemon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOLLY SMITH, Caf\'e9 Juanita (Seattle)\par
chocolate and cocoa, when cauliflower is caramelized\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
CREAM AND MILK\par
cumin\par
currants, dried\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
egg, hard-boiled, esp. yolk\par
French cuisine\par
garam masala\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
greens\par
hollandaise sauce\par
Indian cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mussels\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
mustard: oil, seeds\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, green\par
ONIONS: green, red\par
orange: juice, zest\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
pine nuts\par
poppy seeds\par
potatoes, red (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
saffron\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
sauces: b\'e9chamel, brown butter, cheese, cream, hollandaise, Mornay\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
soups\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
truffles, white\par
turmeric\par
vinegar: red, white wine\par
watercress\par
yogurt (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cauliflower + anchovies + red pepper flakes + garlic + olive oil\par
cauliflower + bread crumbs + brown butter + parsley\par
cauliflower + cilantro + cloves + cumin + turmeric\par
cauliflower + cream + sorrel\par
cauliflower + curry + apple\par
cauliflower + curry + vinegar\par
cauliflower + garlic + mint + pasta\par
cauliflower + pine nuts + lime\par
CAVIAR\par
Season: winter\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: very light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
blini, esp. whole wheat\par
bread, esp. toast points\par
chives\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
eggs\par
French cuisine\par
lemon\par
onion, esp. raw\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
Russian cuisine\par
salt\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
vodka\par
white chocolate\par
wine, Champagne\par
There is an obvious reason why you could argue that white chocolate and caviar\par
go together and that is because of the fact that you are pairing fat and salt. The\par
combination, however, runs a lot deeper than that. The amine [organic chemical\par
compounds] levels in caviar and white chocolate are such that the two\par
ingredients almost \ldblquote melt\rdblquote  together.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HESTON BLUMENTHAL, THE FAT DUCK (ENGLAND)\par
Dishes\par
Yellowtail Tuna with Spinach Puree, Potato Salad, and Osetra Caviar and\par
Vodka Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Danube (New York City)\par
Scrambled Egg with Lime Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche and Sturgeon Caviar \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry\par
Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Royal Ostera Caviar Served with Warm Crepes, Toast, and Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Caviar-Pasta: Osetra on a Nest of Tagliolini, Quail Egg, and Bacon\par
Carbonara Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
CAYENNE, GROUND\par
Taste: piquant\par
Function: warming\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Cayenne tastes hotter the more it cooks.\par
basil\par
beans\par
bell peppers\par
Cajun cuisine\par
cheese and cheese sauces\par
chili\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
corn\par
crab\par
Creole cuisine\par
cumin\par
eggplant\par
fish\par
garlic\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon\par
lobster\par
meat\par
Mexican cuisine\par
oil\par
onions\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
sardines\par
sauces\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
stews\par
tomatoes\par
AVOID\par
caviar\par
delicate flavors\par
truffles\par
Using a pinch of cayenne is like having a turbo versus a regular engine in your\par
car. The cayenne goes into you so fast it is like creating an engine for your\par
flavors. It will create a certain heat and speedy access to your flavors. I use\par
cayenne in everything. However, it has to be done carefully. It has to be just a\par
pinch at the last minute. If you are using basil, it will make the flavor even\par
stronger.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cayenne + coriander + cumin + garlic\par
CELERY\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: astringent\par
Botanical relatives: carrots\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, cream, gratin\'e9, raw, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
butter\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cheese, esp. blue, feta, goat, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, Roquefort\par
chervil\par
chicken and other poultry\par
chickpeas and hummus\par
chives\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
fish\par
garlic\par
legumes\par
lemon, juice\par
lovage\par
mirepoix (key ingredient)\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
Of all vegetables, celery has one of the strongest flavors. To me, it is almost like\par
a truffle. In a mirepoix, you need all the vegetables \f2\emdash\f1  but if I could have only\par
one, it would be celery. I love its earthy flavor. Celery and black truffles are my\par
favorite combination. They work in part because they come out of the ground at\par
the same time of year. Any root vegetable also works with celery. I enjoy celery\par
root and celery separately as well as together.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
peanuts and peanut butter\par
pepper, white\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
salads: chicken, potato, shrimp, tuna\par
salt\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
stir-fried dishes\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
stuffings\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato juice\par
truffles, black\par
turnips\par
vinegar: tarragon, wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
celery + carrots + onions (aka mirepoix)\par
celery + tarragon + vinegar\par
CELERY ROOT\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, deep-fry, raw, roast, steam\par
Tips: Always peel before using.\par
allspice\par
apples\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
beets\par
brown butter\par
butter\par
capers\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery leaves\par
cheese: Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, Swiss\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chives\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
fennel leaves\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lovage\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
marjoram\par
MAYONNAISE\par
mushrooms\par
MUSTARD, DIJON\par
nutmeg\par
oil: peanut, sesame, walnut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
Dishes\par
Celery Root Soup with Spiced Pumpernickel Bread, Confit Shallot, and\par
Parsley Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter, Charlie Trotter\rquote s (Chicago)\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
POTATOES, ESP. MASHED\par
rice\par
rutabagas\par
sage\par
salads, esp. green, tuna\par
salt, kosher\par
seafood\par
soups\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
truffles, esp. black\par
turnips\par
veal\par
vegetables, root\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: cider, wine\par
watercress\par
wild rice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
celery root + cream + potatoes + vinegar\par
celery root + lemon + mayonnaise + mustard\par
CELERY SALT\par
Bloody Marys\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
Tabasco sauce\par
CELERY SEED\par
Taste: bitter, pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
allspice\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
breads\par
Cajun/Creole cuisines\par
cheese, e.g., blue\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
coriander\par
crab\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
German cuisine\par
ginger\par
Italian cuisine\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
onions\par
paprika\par
peas\par
pepper\par
potatoes\par
Russian cuisine\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
stews\par
stuffing\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables and vegetable juices\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
CHAMOMILE\par
Taste: sweet\par
Asian cuisine\par
chicken\par
chocolate, white\par
desserts\par
fish (e.g., halibut)\par
honey\par
lemon\par
rice\par
tea\par
veal\par
CHAMPAGNE\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
blackberries\par
caviar\par
cherries\par
cranberries\par
lemon\par
lime\par
melon\par
mint\par
raspberries\par
strawberries\par
CHARD (aka Swiss chard)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, parboil, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cheese: Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
cured meats\par
egg dishes\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
*GARLIC\par
Italian cuisine, esp. pasta\par
lamb, esp. chops\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
mushrooms, chanterelle\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, esp. spring or yellow\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
pasta (including using to color green pasta)\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
saffron\par
salt, kosher\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chard + bell peppers + pecorino cheese + eggplant\par
chard + red pepper flakes + lemon juice\par
CHARDONNAY\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
butter and butter sauces\par
chicken\par
crab\par
cream and cream sauces\par
fish\par
lobster\par
salmon\par
scallops\par
shellfish\par
veal\par
CHEESE \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also specific cheeses)\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 sour\par
Function: cooling\par
apples\par
breads, esp. neutral-flavored\par
celery, esp. with cheese sauces and dishes\par
cherries, esp. with soft cheeses\par
cured meats, esp. ham\par
dates, esp. Medjool\par
dried fruits, esp. dates, figs\par
grapes\par
nuts, esp. hazelnuts, walnuts\par
pears\par
CHEESE, ASIAGO\par
almonds\par
bacon\par
figs\par
Since cheese is a near-perfect food, I sometimes look for the few nutrients\par
missing in cheese that can be found in other foods. The two essential nutrients\par
that cheese does not provide are vitamin C and fiber. This recommends fruits\par
especially \f2\emdash\f1  and makes a great start to the day: cheese, some high-fiber vitamin\par
C\f2\endash\f1 rich fruit, some whole grain organic bread, and coffee. The breads I prefer\par
with cheese are usually neutral flavored, though I fully appreciate the nutty or\par
herbed or fruity breads as natural partners for cheeses. The main reason I prefer\par
neutral flavors in my breads is because I don\rquote t want to meddle with the flavors in\par
the cheeses themselves. I\rquote m kind of a purist on that! Usually, the softer the\par
cheese, the harder the bread \f2\emdash\f1  to an extent. And high-pectin, high-fiber fruits\par
[e.g., apples, pears, apricots, plums, nectarines, peaches, figs] make natural\par
accompaniments for many, many cheeses.\par
Which cheeses? My faves with my espresso to which I add a little unfiltered raw\par
honey would be the pressed sheep milk cheeses: Ossau Iraty, Roncal, Zamorano,\par
Berkswell, Spenwood, Trade Lake Cedar, Vermont Shepherd, manchego, or\par
Pecorino Foglie Noce. But I\rquote m happy with whatever is looking good, and\par
preferably the harder aged cheeses: sheep, goat, or cow.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
With aged or strong cheese, you need something fruity or sweet to contrast with\par
the strong flavor. Pecorino is very strong, so you need something sweet with it.\par
With an aged or hard cheese, I like to serve some chestnut honey, a fruit jam, or\par
watermelon confiture. If I have some aged goat cheese, I like a mostarda [Italian\par
mustard fruit]. With sharper cheese, I also like a nice sweet wine, especially an\par
Italian Passito. With fresh young cheese, I simply like some good bread.\par
Chestnut honey, while good with aged cheese, does not work with a young\par
cheese.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Honey, jam, and mostarda go great with cheese. Most honey works best with\par
younger cheeses and soft-ripened cheeses, especially if they have a chalky\par
quality to them. I love mountain Gorgonzola with chestnut honey; it is crazy! In\par
Italy, we call jam a confitura or marmalata. I like it with saltier cheeses like\par
Parmesan, or with more assertive cheeses. Mostarda is made of fruits cooked in\par
a white wine mustard syrup until they are candied. So, you have a sweet candy\par
effect with the spicy mustard. It goes with any savory firm cheese, and\par
particularly well with pecorino and Taleggio.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
grapes\par
Italian cuisine\par
pasta\par
potatoes\par
salads\par
CHEESE, AZEITAO\par
foie gras\par
CHEESE, BLUE (See also Gorgonzola, Roquefort, Stilton, etc.)\par
almonds\par
apples\par
beef\par
bread, esp. with nuts and/or raisins\par
celery\par
chestnuts, roasted\par
cream cheese\par
dill\par
figs, esp. with Gorgonzola\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY, esp. chestnut or tupelo\par
mustard, Dijon\par
pasta\par
PEARS, esp. with Stilton\par
port\par
potatoes\par
salt, kosher\par
sour cream\par
steaks\par
vinegar, white wine\par
walnut bread\par
walnuts, esp. with Stilton\par
walnuts, candied\par
watercress\par
CHEESE, BRIE\par
almonds\par
apples\par
bread, esp. French\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
Dishes\par
Baked Blue Cheesecake Mousse with Rhubarb Compote and Celery Confit\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Bruschetta with Burrata Cheese, Caponata, and Fava Bean Puree \f2\emdash\f1  Hiro\par
Sone, Terra (St. Helena, California)\par
A wonderful combination I discovered recently that surprised me was Azeitao\par
cheese with foie gras.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I like blue cheese, either Roquefort or Stilton, served simply with a walnut bread\par
and a glass of port.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
In general, the more intense a blue cheese is in its own right, the lighter and\par
more delicate the honey you\rquote ll want to pair it with. I like Colorado star thistle\par
honey [which is creamy, with cinnamon notes].\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ADRIAN MURCIA, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
crudit\'e9s (e.g., raw carrots, celery)\par
dates\par
fennel\par
figs\par
French cuisine\par
nuts\par
melon\par
onions\par
pears\par
pistachios\par
strawberries\par
white wine\par
CHEESE, BURRATA\par
beans, fava\par
bread\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine\par
olive oil\par
peaches\par
pesto\par
plums\par
salt, esp. sea\par
tomatoes\par
vincotto (cooked wine)\par
CHEESE, CABRALES\par
figs\par
grapes, esp. red\par
ham, Serrano\par
honey\par
pears\par
salads\par
steak\par
CHEESE, CAMEMBERT\par
arugula\par
fruit, fresh\par
grapes\par
lettuces (e.g., baby greens)\par
melon\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
pears\par
pecans\par
plums\par
salads\par
strawberries\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
CHEESE, CHEDDAR\par
APPLES\par
bacon\par
brandy, apple, e.g., Calvados\par
bread, esp. French, pumpernickel, or whole wheat\par
butter, unsalted\par
cayenne\par
chutney, Indian\par
cider\par
cream\par
dates\par
egg dishes\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
hamburgers\par
honey, esp. fruit (e.g., blueberry, raspberry)\par
mirepoix, esp. for soup\par
mostarda (mustard fruits)\par
nuts\par
oil, vegetable\par
paprika\par
pasta, esp. macaroni\par
pears and pear paste\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
quince paste\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, COLBY\par
apples\par
bacon\par
beer\par
bread, rye\par
cider, apple\par
onions\par
pears\par
potatoes\par
CHEESE, COMT\'c9\par
ham\par
hazelnut oil\par
greens, salad\par
Cheddar is a particularly friendly cheese to food pairing partners.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ADRIAN MURCIA, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
CHEESE, COW\rquote S MILK \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
cherries\par
fruits, stone (e.g., apricots, cherries, nectarines, peaches, plums, etc.)\par
melons\par
CHEESE, CREAM (See Cream Cheese)\par
CHEESE, EMMENTAL\par
bacon\par
bread, rye, esp. lighter\par
potatoes\par
CHEESE, \'c9POISSES\par
cherries\par
marmalade, citrus\par
pears\par
CHEESE, EXPLORATEUR\par
pomegranate\par
CHEESE, FETA\par
bell peppers, red\par
bread: olive, pita\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chickpeas\par
dill\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
eggplant\par
figs\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
honey\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
meats, grilled\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, Greek\par
onions, red\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
sage\par
salads\par
sauces\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
thyme\par
vinegar, red wine\par
walnuts\par
watermelon\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
feta cheese + chicken + mint\par
feta cheese + roasted red bell peppers + mint\par
feta cheese + salad greens + mint\par
CHEESE, FONTINA\par
chutney\par
endive\par
fondue\par
fruit, fresh\par
grapes\par
mostarda (mustard fruits)\par
pears\par
plums\par
salads\par
sandwiches\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, FROMAGE BLANC\par
cranberries, sweetened\par
figs\par
CHEESE, GARROTXA\par
figs\par
CHEESE, GOAT\rquote S MILK \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
almonds\par
honey\par
nuts\par
oil, walnut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
pepper, black\par
pomegranate\par
thyme\par
I enjoy the combination of cherries with Lancashire [a premier English cow\rquote s\par
milk cheese].\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, Artisanal Cheese Center (New York City)\par
Dishes\par
Goat Cheese Tortelloni with Dried Orange and Wild Fennel Pollen \f2\emdash\f1  Mario\par
Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Rich Goat\rquote s Milk Cheesecake with Blossom Honey Ice Cream, Fuyu\par
Persimmons, and Huckleberries \f2\emdash\f1  Elizabeth Dahl, pastry chef, Naha\par
(Chicago)\par
Mixed Green Salad with Coach Farm\rquote s Triple Cr\'e8me Goat Cheese, Toasted\par
Pumpkin Seeds, and Apple Cider Vinegar \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern\par
(New York City)\par
Goat Cheese Salad: Braised Fennel, Toasted Hazelnuts, Orange, and ExtraVirgin Olive Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
CHEESE, GOAT \f2\emdash\f1  FRESH (e.g., ch\'e8vre)\par
almonds\par
apples, esp. green\par
apricots, esp. dried\par
basil\par
beets\par
bell peppers: green, esp. red\par
blackberries\par
bread, esp. French or with nuts, olives, and/or raisins, whole wheat\par
broccoli\par
butter\par
cauliflower\par
cheese: Parmesan, ricotta\par
cherries, sour or sweet\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cranberries, esp. dried\par
cream\par
dates\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
greens, salad, esp. arugula\par
herbs\par
honey\par
I enjoy pomegranate with my Ibores [a Spanish goat\rquote s milk cheese].\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Almond-Infused Goat\rquote s Milk Cheesecake\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Mediterranean \ldblquote Greek Salad\rdblquote  of Mt. Vikos Feta, Kalamata Olives, Plum\par
Tomatoes, Cucumbers, Torn Mint and Oregano, Warm Feta Cheese\par
\ldblquote Turnover\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
I will pair thyme with goat cheese and cherries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
If you are going to make a dessert with cheese, you want it to be a softer cheese.\par
I make a goat cheese cake with berries and for that I use a milder goat cheese.\par
Goat cheese and lemon work really well together, because the acidity of the\par
lemon juice cuts the fat of the goat cheese.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
I like strawberries with my Loire Valley ch\'e8vres.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
LEMON, juice\par
milk\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oil, sesame\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, esp. green, Spanish, or Vidalia\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pears: dried, fresh\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
port\par
potatoes\par
raspberries\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. light\par
sage\par
salami\par
salt, sea\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
thyme\par
vegetables, raw\par
vinegar, cider\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato jam\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
goat cheese + almonds + honey + pears\par
goat cheese + cherries + thyme\par
goat cheese + fennel seeds + orange zest + pasta\par
goat cheese + honey + persimmons\par
goat cheese + pancetta + shallots\par
Some enjoy the combination of chocolate and cheese. If the idea intrigues you, I\par
recommend trying a good dark chocolate with an aged Alpine cheese [a style\par
native to the French and Swiss Alps, of which Gruy\'e8re is one of the most\par
famous], such as Hoch Ybrig, Appenzeller, or Prattigauer.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Swiss mountain cheeses [e.g., Appenzeller, Comt\'e9, Gruy\'e8re] are a cheese\par
snob\rquote s Holy Grail of cheeses. Their \ldblquote cooked milk\rdblquote  character makes them great\par
with dark, cooked fruit preserves such as fig preserves. They also go well with\par
oloroso sherry, which has its own dark, cooked fruit flavors.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ADRIAN MURCIA, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
CHEESE, GORGONZOLA\par
apples\par
brandy\par
cherries: sour, sweet\par
cognac\par
corn\par
cream\par
dulce de leche\par
figs\par
grapes\par
honey, esp. chestnut\par
Italian cuisine\par
mint\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
pasta\par
PEARS\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
prosciutto\par
salads (e.g., spinach)\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
WALNUTS\par
wine, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Gorgonzola + mint + walnuts\par
CHEESE, GOUDA\par
apples, esp. with aged and/or smoked cheese\par
apricots\par
cherries, esp. with young cheese\par
melon\par
mushrooms\par
peaches, esp. with young cheese\par
pears, esp. with aged or smoked cheese\par
spinach\par
CHEESE, GRUY\'c8RE\par
apples\par
arugula\par
bread\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate, dark, esp. with aged Gruy\'e8re\par
fondues\par
garlic\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
onions\par
souffl\'e9s\par
soups, esp. onion\par
spinach\par
I enjoy raspberries with my Hoja Santa, with a little mint thrown in.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Swiss cuisine\par
thyme\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, HOJA SANTA\par
mint\par
raspberries\par
CHEESE, JACK\par
almonds\par
figs\par
pears\par
pecans\par
prunes\par
quince paste\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, MAHON (aged Spanish cheese)\par
quince paste\par
CHEESE, MANCHEGO\par
ALMONDS, esp. roasted Spanish\par
anchovies\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
bread, esp. crusty and fig or other fruit bread\par
figs and fig cake\par
ham, Serrano\par
olive oil\par
olives, green or black Spanish\par
onions, esp. caramelized\par
parsley\par
peppers, piquillo\par
plum paste\par
*QUINCE PASTE\par
salads\par
Spanish cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
manchego cheese + almonds + quince paste\par
CHEESE, MASCARPONE (See Mascarpone)\par
CHEESE, MONTEREY JACK\par
chicken\par
enchiladas\par
fresh fruit\par
CHEESE, MOZZARELLA\par
anchovies\par
BASIL\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine\par
meats, cured (e.g., salami)\par
olive oil\par
Dishes\par
Mozzarella di Bufala, Eggplant Agrodolce, Artichoke con Pesto \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew\par
Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
olives\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
pizza\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sopressata\par
spinach\par
*TOMATOES\par
tomatoes, sun-dried\par
truffles, black\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mozzarella cheese + basil + olive oil + tomatoes\par
mozzarella cheese + olives + prosciutto\par
CHEESE, MUENSTER\par
apples\par
bread, crusty\par
caraway seeds\par
cherries\par
fennel\par
grapes\par
CHEESE, PARMESAN\par
basil\par
beans, fava\par
carpaccio\par
dates\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fruits, stone\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
honey, esp. chestnut\par
ITALIAN CUISINE\par
melon\par
mushrooms\par
olive oil\par
PASTA\par
pears\par
pizza\par
prosciutto\par
risottos\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic, esp. aged\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, PECORINO\par
bacon\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
duck confit\par
grapes\par
greens, salad\par
honey, chestnut\par
lemon, juice\par
mostarda (mustard fruits)\par
olive oil\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pepper, white\par
prosciutto\par
ricotta cheese\par
sopressata\par
vinegar, balsamic, esp. aged\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, PIAVE\par
cured meats\par
CHEESE, PROVOLONE\par
figs\par
grapes\par
Italian cuisine\par
Piave cheese works with an array of different cured meats.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
If you open my refrigerator at home, you will always find a piece of cheese! I\par
love many cheeses, but there will definitely be a piece of ParmigianoReggiano. It never goes bad and is so versatile. I can cut a piece off to go with a\par
glass of Prosecco as an ap\'e9ritif, serve it after dinner with red wine, slice a piece\par
for a sandwich, or grate it over some pasta.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I was in Parma, Italy, in a restaurant and out came my glass of Prosecco followed\par
by the server cutting off hunks of Parmigiano-Reggiano to serve me. I thought\par
it was a beautiful way to begin! It is a way to leave your world behind, and begin\par
your meal.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOLLY SMITH, CAF\'e9 JUANITA (SEATTLE)\par
Dishes\par
Parmesan Broth with Prosciutto and Peas, Scallion Parmesan Flan \f2\emdash\f1\par
Sanford D\rquote Amato, Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
Gina DePalma of New York\rquote s Babbo on Babbo\rquote s Cheese Plate\par
At Babbo, I oversee the cheese selection, which has seven choices. The biggest\par
challenge with Italian cheese is that there are so many \ldblquote superstars\rdblquote  that you just\par
can\rquote t not offer them. So, in the seven slots we have many standard choices but\par
they are amazing: \f2\bullet\f1  Parmigiano-Reggiano: This is the \ldblquote undisputed king of all\par
cheeses\rdblquote  according to Mario [Batali]!\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Taleggio: This washed-rind cheese is very wet, has the distinctive orange color,\par
and is gooey. The interior is sweet and the rind is assertive.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Gorgonzola Piccante: This is firmer, bluer, nutty, and just amazing!\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Coach Farm Goat: Though it is not from Italy, it is the goat cheese we choose.\par
[Mario Batali\rquote s wife\rquote s family owns the Coach Farm Dairy.]\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Robiola: This is a soft-ripened cheese from Piedmont.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Pecorino: This is a sheep\rquote s milk cheese that is nothing like the PecorinoRomano that you get in your deli to grate over pasta. This is made in many areas\par
around Italy. We may use one from the south or Tuscany or one that is rubbed\par
with tomato or aged underground from another part of the country.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  The Seventh Cheese: I play around with the seventh cheese and change it\par
often but a recent favorite is a Piave, which is like an English Cheddar. It is from\par
the Veneto along the Piave River.\par
lime, juice\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
pasta (e.g., lasagna)\par
pears\par
pizza\par
prosciutto\par
CHEESE, REBLOCHON\par
fennel\par
panforte (Italian fruit and nut cake)\par
pistachios\par
CHEESE, RICOTTA\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beans, fava\par
berries\par
blueberries\par
bread\par
cheese: mozzarella, Parmesan, pecorino\par
cheesecake\par
chestnuts\par
chives\par
chocolate, dark\par
cinnamon\par
coffee / espresso\par
cream\par
dates\par
egg dishes (e.g., frittatas, omelets)\par
figs, esp. dried\par
fruits, dried\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
herbs\par
HONEY, esp. chestnut, eucalyptus, or lavender\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon, esp. juice, zest\par
mace\par
mascarpone\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
orange, esp. juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
prosciutto\par
Prosecco\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salt, kosher\par
sorrel\par
spinach\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
tapenade\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts, esp. candied or toasted\par
wine, red, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
ricotta + bread + honey + Prosecco\par
On our brunch menu with our corn and saffron pancakes, we serve fresh ricotta\par
to be used instead of butter.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
CHEESE, ROQUEFORT\par
butter, unsalted\par
cognac\par
cream\par
figs\par
honey\par
leeks\par
oil, walnut\par
pears\par
pepper\par
potatoes, creamer\par
salt\par
vinaigrette\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, SAUTERNES\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Roquefort cheese + figs + pears\par
CHEESE, SHEEP\rquote S MILK \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bread, esp. olive\par
ham, esp. Serrano\par
honey\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
panforte\par
pepper, black\par
quince paste\par
Dishes\par
Bruschetta with Favas and New York State Ricotta \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo\par
(New York City)\par
Sheep\rquote s Milk Ricotta Ravioli with Heirloom Tomato, Arugula, Vin Cotto \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Ricotta and Robiola Cheesecake with Figs and Raspberries \f2\emdash\f1  Gina\par
DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Corn and Saffron Pancakes with a Spicy Poached Pear and Fresh Ricotta \f2\emdash\f1\par
Brad Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Bellwether Farms Ricotta Fritters with Cara Cara and Blood Orange\par
Compote, Vanilla Cr\'e8me Anglaise \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon\par
(San Francisco)\par
Ricotta Gnocchi with Fava Beans, Sage, and Lemon Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers,\par
Zuni Caf\'e9 (San Francisco)\par
I\rquote m a fan of apricot with Berkswell [an English sheep\rquote s milk cheese].\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX McCALMAN, Artisanal Cheese Center (New York City)\par
CHEESE, SPANISH (See Cheese: Cabrales, Manchego)\par
CHEESE, STILTON\par
apples\par
dates\par
honey\par
pears\par
pecans\par
port\par
salads\par
sauces\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, SWISS\par
asparagus\par
bread, esp. pumpernickel\par
grapes\par
ham\par
pears\par
CHEESE, TALEGGIO\par
hazelnuts\par
mostarda (mustard fruits)\par
pears\par
CHEESE, TRIPLE CR\'c8ME\par
cherries\par
figs\par
hazelnuts\par
herbs\par
honey\par
m0starda (mustard fruits)\par
nut bread\par
olives\par
pears\par
vegetables, roasted\par
walnuts\par
CHEESE, VACHERIN\par
cherries\par
hazelnuts\par
CHEESE, VALDEON\par
meats: cured, smoked\par
steak\par
CHEESE, VERMONT SHEPHERD\par
almonds\par
apples\par
fennel\par
CHERRIES \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 late summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: flamb\'e9, poach, raw, stew\par
allspice\par
ALMONDS\par
amaretto\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
cake\par
caramel\par
cassis\par
cheese: Brie, goat, ricotta\par
cherries, dried\par
CHOCOLATE, ESP. DARK, WHITE\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coffee / espresso\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
currants, red\par
custards (e.g., cr\'e8me caramel, flan, etc.)\par
duck\par
fennel\par
figs\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
goose\par
Grand Marnier\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream, vanilla\par
*KIRSCH\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
liqueur: almond, orange\par
mascarpone\par
meats, fatty, esp. roasted\par
melon\par
meringue\par
nectarines\par
nuts\par
oats\par
orange: juice, zest\par
p\'e2t\'e9\par
peaches\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, green\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pork\par
port, esp. ruby\par
poultry, fatty, esp. roasted\par
quince\par
raspberries\par
rice pudding\par
rose hips\par
rum\par
sage, esp. with tart cherries\par
salads\par
salt\par
sour cream\par
stocks: chicken, duck, veal\par
SUGAR\par
VANILLA\par
vermouth, sweet\par
vinegar: balsamic, ice wine, red wine\par
vodka\par
walnuts\par
WINE: dry red (e.g., Bordeaux, Merlot), sparkling wine/Champagne\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cherries + almonds + cream + kirsch + vanilla\par
cherries + chocolate + walnuts\par
cherries + coconut + custard\par
cherries + coffee + cream\par
cherries + goat cheese + ice wine vinegar + black pepper + thyme\par
cherries + honey + pistachios + yogurt\par
cherries + mint + vanilla\par
cherries + orange + sugar + dry red wine\par
cherries + sweet vermouth + vanilla\par
Cherries can stand up to a lot of flavors. They have more juice to them as well as\par
complexity. Almonds go with cherries. Dark chocolate actually goes better with\par
cherries than it does raspberries, and white chocolate works with cherries as\par
well.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
If you have perfect ingredients in the summertime, you don\rquote t have to do much to\par
them. With our perfect cherries [Michigan, while at Tribute restaurant], we\par
halved them, sprinkled them with sugar, and heated them with a blowtorch so\par
that they were just warmed through. The slightly caramelized sugar made a huge\par
difference in the flavor. I used a goat cream cheese worked to a texture similar to\par
mascarpone cheese, which I shaped into quenelles. Served alongside were some\par
ice wine vinegar caramel sauce and a crispy crepe. Before serving, I added\par
individual thyme leaves and a crack of black pepper. These are all really classic\par
flavors, especially the cheese with black pepper and cherries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I was reading an old Fannie Farmer cookbook from the late 1800s about making\par
cherry jam. In the recipe, they would take the cherry pits and crush them. I\par
thought it was crazy but tried it. When you take cherry pits and crush them, it\par
gives you an almond flavor. I made some pickled sour cherries with the crushed\par
pits in cheesecloth with the pickling liquid and I got this great almondy flavor\par
that went deep inside the cherries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I like to let them shine on their own. But I do really like cherries and grappa.\par
Mario [Batali] has a home in Michigan and he brought me back a case of\par
cherries. They were so perfect I just macerated them in grappa and torn mint\par
leaves. I served them in a bowl with a dollop of mascarpone. Cherries also work\par
well with mint.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I loved cherries so much growing up that I would climb up our cherry tree and\par
eat as many as I could. Then I would realize I didn\rquote t know how to get back down\par
and would cry until the neighbors would get me down. I still love cherries and\par
especially in cherry pie or a clafoutis. Cherries work well with vanilla or\par
poached in red wine, but I like to keep them as simple as possible.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Cherry-Almond Blancmange over Frangipane and Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche Soup \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Warm Black Garnet Cherry\f2\endash\f1 Rhubarb Pie with Almond Butter Crunch Ice\par
Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Black Garnet Cherries, Strawberries, Pistachios, Marshall Farms Honey,\par
Straus Organic Whole Milk Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon\par
(San Francisco)\par
CHERVIL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: delicate, soft-leaved\par
Volume: very quiet\par
Tips: Always use chervil fresh, not cooked.\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
beans, esp. fava, green\par
beets\par
bouquet garni (key ingredient)\par
carrots\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chicken\par
chives\par
crab\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
dill\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (key ingredient, along with chives, parsley, tarragon)\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
game birds\par
halibut\par
herbes de Provence (typical ingredient, along with basil, fennel, marjoram,\par
rosemary, sage, summer savory, and thyme)\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon thyme\par
lettuce\par
lobster\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
parsley\par
peas\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
One thing chervil has going for it is its looks. Chervil is so cute, it is adorable!\par
You can very carefully make little tiny brushes of them and put them around the\par
plate. Not only does it taste good, but it says to the people eating the dish that\par
you are taking care of them.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Proven\'e7al cuisine\par
salads, esp. potato, and salad dressings\par
sauces, esp. creamy\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
sole\par
soups, esp. creamy\par
spinach\par
squash\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
venison\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chervil + chives + fish + parsley\par
chervil + chives + parsley + tarragon (fines herbes)\par
Dishes\par
Chestnut Spice Cake with Mascarpone Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef,\par
Babbo (New York City)\par
Chestnut Sugar Tart, Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Johnny Iuzzini, pastry chef, Jean Georges (New York City) I like to take one\par
ingredient and see how much I can do with it. I made a frozen chestnut\par
semifreddo with bits of candied chestnuts. This was then set on an orangesoaked chestnut sponge cake, next to a chestnut wafer and chestnut paste. I\par
needed a complementary flavor, and I have always liked the combination of pear\par
and chestnut. They both have a richness but depending on how the pear is\par
handled, it can add freshness and acidity. I roasted the pear in sugar, butter, and\par
ice wine vinegar and finished it in the oven until soft. The pear was then diced\par
tartare-like and had orange confit added. The juices from the pear were the only\par
sauce.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Chestnuts have a bursty flavor and they work with chocolate and pears. You\par
have to combine them with earthy flavors. If you paired chestnuts with berries,\par
they would just get lost.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
CHESTNUTS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: boil, candy, grill, puree, raw, roast\par
APPLES: CIDER, FRUIT, JUICE\par
Armagnac\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
brandy\par
Brussels sprouts\par
butter, unsalted\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
celery\par
celery root\par
celery seeds\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chicken (accompaniment)\par
chocolate, esp. dark or white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
CREAM OR MILK\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
desserts\par
duck\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
game (accompaniment)\par
ginger\par
ham\par
honey, esp. chestnut\par
Italian cuisine, esp. Tuscan\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
mushrooms: cepes/porcini\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pepper: black, white\par
plums\par
pork (accompaniment)\par
poultry (e.g., chicken, turkey)\par
prosciutto\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
risotto\par
rum\par
sage\par
salt, sea\par
sauces\par
sausages\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
stews\par
STOCK, CHICKEN\par
stuffing (e.g., for poultry)\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
wine, esp. sweet Marsala or sherry\par
AVOID\par
berries\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chestnuts + apples + cream\par
chestnuts + bacon + fennel\par
chestnuts + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + sugar\par
chestnuts + orange + pear\par
CHICKEN\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam,\par
stew, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
artichokes\par
avocadoes\par
bacon\par
bananas\par
BASIL: regular, cinnamon\par
BAY LEAF\par
beans: red, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers: red, green, yellow\par
bouquet garni\par
brandy, esp. apple (in sauce)\par
bread crumbs or panko\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
buttermilk\par
Calvados\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
CARROTS\par
cashews (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
cauliflower\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
celery seeds\par
chard\par
cheese: Asiago, blue, Comt\'e9, Emmental, Fontina, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chicken livers\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers: dried red (e.g., chipotle), fresh green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chives\par
cider\par
cilantro\par
CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
coconut milk (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cranberries: dried\par
cream (e.g., French, Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
currants\par
curry leaves (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
curry powder\par
curry sauce\par
daikon\par
dates\par
dill\par
dumplings\par
endive\par
escarole\par
fenugreek\par
figs\par
fines herbes (i.e., chervil, chives, parsley, tarragon)\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
five-spice powder\par
galangal\par
garam masala (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
GARLIC\par
GINGER: fresh, ground\par
Grand Marnier\par
grapefruit, juice\par
grapes and grape juice\par
greens\par
guava\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
hoisin sauce\par
Red beans and rice with andouille sausage is my favorite! When we opened up\par
after the hurricane [Katrina] and were serving on paper plates, I made a roasted\par
Tabasco chicken served with dirty rice, with the sausage stuffed in a bell pepper\par
alongside red bean puree. For another dish, I was inspired by a diner down the\par
street from us that had chicken and waffles on the menu, which is an old\par
Southern dish. My take is to make a savory waffle and to add Boursin cheese\par
with lots of herbs. Then I pair it with chicken thighs braised in a coq au vin\par
blanc and serve it with spinach. The dish is simple, but I just love the flavors.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
Dishes\par
Taquitos de Pollo: Crispy Taquitos Filled with Chicken and Poblanos, with\par
Homemade Sour Cream, Salsa Verde, A\'f1ejo Cheese, and Guacamole \f2\emdash\f1\par
Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Chicken Braised in Black Pepper Gravy with Summer Root Vegetables, Hen\par
o\rquote  Woods Mushrooms, and Rosemary Cream Biscuits \f2\emdash\f1  Jeffrey Buben,\par
Vidalia (Washington, DC)\par
Hoffman Ranch Breast of Chicken with Chanterelles and Thyme Jus \f2\emdash\f1\par
Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Chicken Tagine with Olives, Preserved Lemons, and Green Peas \f2\emdash\f1  Lahsen\par
Ksiyer, Casaville (New York City)\par
Half a Chicken Cut in Pieces and Braised in a Tequila\f2\endash\f1 White Vinegar Sauce\par
with Green Olives, Golden Raisins, and Almonds \f2\emdash\f1  Zarela Martinez, Zarela\par
(New York City)\par
\ldblquote Southern Fried\rdblquote  Chicken Salad, Roasted Sweet Corn, Candied Pecans,\par
Shaved Red Onions, and Buttermilk Ranch Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian,\par
Naha (Chicago)\par
Balsamic-Caramel Chicken with Broccoli and Walnuts \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope,\par
T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Roast Chicken Breast with Wild Mushrooms, Creamy Polenta, and White\par
Truffle Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Boneless Chicken Breast in Peruvian Adobo Roasted in Our Wood-Burning\par
Oven, Pumpkin and Mango Sauce, Ripe Plantain, and Eggplant Puree \f2\emdash\f1\par
Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Apricot Curry Chicken Salad with Fennel, Cilantro, and Dried Fruit \f2\emdash\f1\par
Charlie Trotter, Trotter\rquote s to Go (Chicago)\par
Lemon-Ghee Marinated and Grilled Specialty Chicken Breast with Roasted\par
Garlic and Cashews \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
Roasted Chicken with Green Olive, Coriander, and Ginger Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  JeanGeorges Vongerichten, Jojo (New York City)\par
honey\par
kale\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
molasses\par
MUSHROOMS: cultivated or wild (e.g., cepes, chanterelles, morels,\par
portobello, shiitake, white)\par
mustard: Dijon, dry, yellow\par
mustard seeds\par
nutmeg\par
nuts: cashews, peanuts\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, hazelnut, peanut, safflower, sesame, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
OLIVES: black, green, kalamata, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS: cipollini, pearl, red, Spanish, spring, sweet\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF (garnish)\par
parsnips\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
peas: black-eyed, green\par
PEPPER: BLACK, PINK, WHITE\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
polenta (accompaniment)\par
pomegranates and pomegranate molasses\par
poppy seeds\par
potatoes (accompaniment)\par
prosciutto\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
ROSEMARY, fresh\par
saffron\par
sage\par
SALT:fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
sauces, Mornay\par
sausages, esp. spicy (e.g., andouille)\par
savory\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry (e.g., manzanilla)\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
STOCKS: chicken, veal\par
sugar: brown, white (pinch)\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
TARRAGON\par
THYME, FRESH\par
TOMATOES AND TOMATO PASTE\par
truffles\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vermouth\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, Chinese black, cider, red wine, sherry, tarragon,\par
white wine\par
waffles\par
whiskey\par
WINE: dry to off-dry white (e.g., Riesling), dry red, rice, sweet wine,\par
vermouth\par
yogurt\par
Andrew Carmellini of New York\rquote s A Voce on Cooking Chicken as\par
a Two-Part Process \f2\emdash\f1  and Applying It to Chicken Cacciatore\par
1. Brining: Sometimes the older techniques inspire me for deeper flavors.\par
Many of these techniques are overlooked. Take brining, for instance. Brining has\par
been done forever with pork chops and chicken, and for the last five years you\par
have heard about it with turkey. The success of brining is more about the salt and\par
it getting in there and softening the protein strands. It is less about all the other\par
flavoring agents.\par
If you want to get started in your kitchen, start with a skin-and bone-on\par
chicken breast. Grab some kosher salt, sugar, or honey as I do, some water, and\par
brine the breast for 30 minutes. When you pull it out of the brine, rinse it, dry it,\par
and let it sit in the refrigerator for a couple of hours so the moisture comes out.\par
You will notice the difference in the texture. The marinated chicken \f2\emdash\f1  even if\par
you overcook it \f2\emdash\f1  will not be dry. It is the best.\par
2. Marinating: The chicken on my menu right now is brined and then\par
marinated for 24 hours. It is crazy how good the chicken becomes. The marinade\par
is made up of roasted garlic, Sicilian oregano, red pepper flakes, lots of lemon,\par
thyme, and olive oil. We joke that it tastes like Zesty Italian Wish-Bone\par
Dressing. It is so delicious.\par
The finished dish is served with poached and saut\'e9ed artichoke, roasted\par
pepper grilled over wood, fennel, and roasted spring onions. These vegetables\par
are all tossed with pesto, and the dish is finished with a tomato sauce made with\par
foamy tomato water and thyme.\par
Chicken Cacciatore\par
We opened up A Voce with chicken cacciatore on our menu and when people\par
heard the name of the dish, they\rquote d just yawn. A lot of times, this dish is just\par
chicken scaloppine with peppers and tomatoes. Ours is a whole different dish:\par
the chicken is on the bone, and brined first, which makes it nice and moist. With\par
it, we serve a homemade peperonata with roasted peppers, onions, garlic, red\par
pepper flakes, rosemary, fresh bay leaf, fresh thyme, and piment d\rquote Espelette [a\par
pepper from France with a smoky flavor]. Here is a place where technique plays\par
a role in the flavor: When you roast peppers, the best way to get the skin off is to\par
put them in a bowl covered with plastic wrap and let them steam. When they are\par
done, you are left with the pepper liquid. What we do is cook with that liquid.\par
To finish this dish, we put a big scoop of the pepper mixture, tomato sauce,\par
garlic puree, onion, red wine vinegar, and fresh bay leaf on the chicken and put it\par
in the oven to roast. The chicken cooks in its own juice then is served with\par
roasted potatoes. It is delicious.\par
What we are doing is layering the flavors. You have the technique of brining\par
the chicken, elevating the flavor profile of the peppers with the sweetness of the\par
onions and herbs, adding a little heat from the piment d\rquote Espelette, and giving\par
body to the sauce from the pepper juice, which is distilled pepper brandy.\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chicken + andouille sausage + red beans + rice\par
chicken + apples + endive + walnuts\par
chicken + asparagus + ginger\par
chicken + avocado + bacon + garlic + mayonnaise + tarragon\par
chicken + basil + cinnamon\par
chicken + chanterelle mushrooms + rosemary\par
chicken + cloves + rosemary + yogurt\par
chicken + coconut + galangal + shiitake mushrooms\par
chicken + coriander + cumin + garlic\par
chicken + cream + grapefruit + pink peppercorns\par
chicken + cream + morels\par
chicken + cumin + garlic + lemon\par
chicken + figs + honey + thyme + dry white wine\par
chicken + fines herbes + mushrooms + spring onions\par
chicken + garlic + lemon\par
chicken + garlic + pancetta + sage + thyme\par
chicken + mustard + thyme\par
CHICKEN LIVERS (See Liver, Chicken)\par
CHICKPEAS (aka garbanzo beans)\par
Season: summer\par
Function: cooling\par
Techniques: simmer\par
apple cider or juice\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bread\par
butter, unsalted\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
cheese, feta\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cumin, esp. toasted (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
curry leaves\par
curry powder\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
garam masala (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
greens (e.g., chard, spinach)\par
ham, Serrano\par
hummus (key ingredient)\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine (as garbanzo beans)\par
Dishes\par
Preserved Lemon Hummus; Roasted Red Pepper and Walnut Puree \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lemon thyme\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, black\par
ONIONS: RED, YELLOW\par
paprika, esp. smoked or sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice, esp. basmati (accompaniment)\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads\par
SALT, KOSHER\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
spinach\par
squash, winter\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tabbouleh (key ingredient)\par
tahini\par
tamarind\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic, red wine, sherry\par
walnuts and walnut oil\par
yogurt (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chickpeas + cayenne + garlic + lemon juice + olive oil + salt + tahini\par
chickpeas + cilantro + cumin\par
chickpeas + garlic + lemon juice + olive oil + thyme\par
chickpeas + garlic + mint\par
chickpeas + garlic + olive oil + parsley\par
CHICORY (See also Endive; Lettuces \f2\emdash\f1  Bitter Greens and\par
Chicories; and Radicchio)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: grill, raw\par
apples\par
bacon\par
capers\par
cheese, esp. Gruy\'e8re and/or fresh\par
cilantro\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
figs\par
fish, smoked\par
garlic\par
ham, Serrano\par
lemon\par
lettuces\par
meats and poultry, richer\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
paprika, smoked\par
parsley\par
prosciutto\par
salads\par
salmon, smoked\par
watercress\par
Dishes\par
Chicory Salad with Fall Root Vegetables, Shaved Pear, and RapeseedMustard Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
CHILE PEPPERS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium (from fresh to dried)\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 very loud (from dried to fresh)\par
Techniques: raw, roast, saut\'e9\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process. The spiciness of chile peppers\par
suggests \ldblquote false heat.\rdblquote\par
Asian cuisine\par
avocado\par
bananas\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
BEANS, ESP. BLACK, PINTO\par
Cajun cuisine\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
cayenne\par
cheese: Fontina, goat, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chocolate\par
CILANTRO, esp. in Latin American cuisine\par
cinnamon\par
coconut and coconut milk, esp. in Asian cuisine\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cumin\par
CURRIES (key ingredient)\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fish sauce, esp. in Asian cuisine\par
fruit, esp. citrus\par
GARLIC\par
GINGER, esp. in Asian cuisine\par
Indian cuisine\par
ketchup\par
Latin American cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lentils\par
LIME, JUICE\par
mangoes\par
marjoram\par
*MEXICAN CUISINE\par
mole sauces\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
Pakistani cuisine\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts, esp. in Asian cuisine\par
pineapple\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salads, esp. bean\par
salsas and other sauces\par
seafood\par
sesame and sesame oil, esp. in Asian cuisine\par
shallots\par
Southwestern American cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
sweet vegetables (e.g., beets, carrots, corn)\par
*THAI CUISINE\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
verbena\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine, sherry\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + cilantro + lime\par
CHILE PEPPERS, ANAHEIM\par
Taste: hot, sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: very quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
salads\par
salsas\par
stuffed peppers\par
CHILE PEPPERS, ANCHO (dried poblanos)\par
Taste: hot, sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
cashews\par
chili\par
sauces, esp. mole\par
soups\par
turkey\par
CHILE PEPPERS, CHIPOTLE (dried, smoked jalape\'f1o peppers)\par
Taste: very hot, smoky\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 very loud\par
avocado\par
beans\par
Central American cuisine\par
chicken\par
chili\par
chocolate\par
cilantro\par
game\par
garlic\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
Mexican cuisine\par
molasses\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
paprika\par
pork\par
rice\par
salsas and sauces\par
salt, esp. kosher\par
soups\par
stews\par
sugar\par
Tex-Mex cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, white\par
CHILE PEPPERS, GUAJILLO\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
eggs\par
jicama\par
lime\par
pork\par
sauces\par
soups\par
stews\par
tomatoes\par
CHILE PEPPERS, HABANERO\par
Taste: very hot, sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: very loud+\par
fish (e.g., snapper)\par
lemon, juice\par
onions\par
pork\par
salsas and sauces\par
sugar\par
CHILE PEPPERS, JALAPE\'d1O\par
Taste: very hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: very loud\par
I have made a red-hot apple gel\'e9e that was a garnish to a panna cotta, taking\par
apple cider and infusing it with cinnamon and jalape\'f1o chile \f2\emdash\f1  which ended up\par
tasting like red-hot candy. I like using fresh jalape\'f1os in an infusion, or an\par
espelette as a finishing note. I also love the idea of chipotle chile paired with\par
chocolate ice cream.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
cheese\par
cinnamon\par
lemon, juice\par
olive oil\par
onions, white\par
salsas and sauces\par
salt, sea\par
soups\par
CHILE PEPPERS, PASILLA (dried chilacas)\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
mole\par
sauces\par
CHILE PEPPERS, PIMENTS D\rquote ESPELETTE\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
cheese, French or Spanish\par
French Basque cuisine\par
olive oil\par
Spanish Basque cuisine\par
CHILE PEPPERS, POBLANO\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
chile peppers, chipotle\par
chiles rellenos\par
cilantro\par
corn\par
garlic\par
onions\par
salads\par
salsas\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables, roasted\par
CHILE PEPPERS, SERRANO\par
Taste: very hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: very loud+\par
Bloody Marys\par
chili powder\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
molasses\par
oil, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, yellow\par
orange, juice\par
salsas\par
stock, chicken\par
vinegar, white\par
CHILEAN CUISINE (See also Latin American Cuisines)\par
chile peppers\par
corn\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
meats\par
olives\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
pepper, black\par
raisins\par
CHILI PASTE\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
Asian cuisine\par
beef\par
marinades\par
pork\par
sauces\par
CHILI POWDER\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
cumin\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tequila\par
CHINESE CUISINE (See also Szechuan Cuisine)\par
Techniques: fry, stir-fry\par
cabbage\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
duck\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hoisin sauce\par
peanuts\par
pork\par
RICE\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shrimp: fresh, dried\par
snow peas\par
SOY SAUCE\par
star anise\par
steaming\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tofu\par
vegetables\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
wheat (e.g., noodles), esp. in northern China\par
wine, rice\par
In Chinese cooking they have a technique called \ldblquote red cooking\rdblquote  that is a dish\par
braised or steamed with star anise, dark soy sauce, cinnamon, and rock sugar. I\par
cook the oxtail for my timbale of oxtail and foie gras that way, and then clarify\par
the broth and turn it into the aspic that holds the dish together. The foie gras is\par
cooked separately and made into a terrine. The dish is then served with gingery\par
pickled vegetables. It is not a Chinese dish in that it is not a dish that you would\par
find in a Chinese restaurant, but it has Chinese influences. The idea of clarifying\par
the broth is typically French. The use of foie gras is not very Chinese. The\par
pickled vegetables are like something you might find in Chinese cooking, but\par
they are done in perfect dice and served as a relish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cabbage + chicken stock\par
garlic + ginger + pork\par
ginger + rice wine + soy sauce\par
soy sauce + sugar\par
CHINESE FIVE-SPICE POWDER (See Five-Spice Powder)\par
CHIVES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Botanical relatives: garlic, leeks, onions, shallots\par
Weight: light, soft-leaved\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Always use fresh, not cooked. Use in stir-fries.\par
avocados\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
butter\par
CHEESE, esp. cheddar, ricotta, and cheese sauces\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
cilantro\par
cream and cream sauces\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
EGGS, EGG DISHES, AND OMELETS\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (ingredient, along with chervil, parsley, tarragon)\par
fish\par
You can\rquote t cook without onions, and chives are a delicate way to get that flavor\par
into a dish. They are good in a soup or a sauce. A chive oil is great drizzled\par
around a plate for flavor as well as appearance.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
garlic\par
herbs, most other\par
marjoram\par
onions, esp. green\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pork\par
POTATOES\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces, esp. cheese and cream based\par
shellfish\par
smoked salmon\par
sole\par
sorrel\par
SOUPS, esp. cream based and cold (e.g., vichyssoise)\par
sour cream\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vegetables and root vegetables\par
vinaigrettes\par
zucchini\par
CHOCOLATE / COCOA \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Taste: bitter\f2\endash\f1 sweet (depending on sugar content)\par
achiote\par
allspice\par
ALMONDS\par
anise seeds\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
BANANAS\par
basil\par
beverages\par
boar\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
brioche or challah\par
butter, unsalted\par
butterscotch\par
CARAMEL, esp. with dark chocolate\par
cardamom\par
cashews\par
cheese, ricotta\par
My chocolate-corn dessert [of soft chocolate ganache and sweet corn in three\par
textures: crunchy corn and hazelnut corn sorbet, and corn tuile] was inspired by\par
freeze-dried corn. [The kernels] are whole with a vibrant sweetness. Corn dates\par
back to the Aztecs, who also loved chocolate, so it\rquote s funny when people ask,\par
\ldblquote Where\rquote d you get the inspiration?\rdblquote  This starts with a layer of milk chocolate\par
hazelnut praline paste, then the corn, and then crushed wafers that give it that Kit\par
Kat candy bar texture; on top of that is some chocolate ganache, then a layer of\par
chocolate. To play off those flavors I serve some espelette [pepper] to give a\par
little heat and some smoked salt from Wales. This dish is about the interplay of\par
the chocolate and the corn. The espelette gives a heat that reminds me of roasted\par
corn salsa. This is an ode to the origin of the inspiration.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
It is hard to think of a fruit or nut that is not improved by combining it with\par
chocolate.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I love chocolate with fruit or nuts or both. My favorite candy bar in the world is\par
a Cadbury Fruit and Nut bar. On my menu I have a chocolate, hazelnut, and\par
orange dessert, which is essentially a Cadbury!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
When it comes to chocolate, keep it simple. That\rquote s always good advice! For\par
simplicity at its best, only two ingredients are necessary: heavy cream and\par
chopped chocolate. Bring the cream to a boil, pour it over the chocolate, and it\par
turns into ganache. Serve it warm with just a spoon. How can you do any better?\par
In my new book, I feature a recipe called Cup O\rquote  Dark Chocolate, and\par
essentially it is ganache poured into a cup. Then you grab a cookie, and have at\par
it!\par
If you want to dip fruit into chocolate, dried fruits such as figs, pear, and\par
pineapple all work really well. People always ask what they can serve to impress\par
their sweetheart on Valentine\rquote s Day, and fresh strawberries are really nice in\par
February. Just make a warm ganache, grab the strawberries, and start dipping.\par
Fresh grapes are fantastic with chocolate. Dip them into the melted chocolate,\par
pop them in the freezer, and when they are frozen, put them into a two-quart\par
container. That way, you will always have a little treat in the freezer. Be careful\par
though \f2\emdash\f1  they are not M&Ms, so they will melt in your hands!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
cherries: regular, sour, dried\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
chocolate, white\par
CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
cocoa powder\par
coconut\par
*COFFEE / ESPRESSO, esp. with dark chocolate\par
cognac\par
Cointreau\par
corn syrup, light\par
CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
currants\par
custard\par
dates\par
DESSERTS\par
duck\par
espelette\par
figs, dried\par
fruit: dried, fresh\par
Everybody is on the chocolate bandwagon now, and we are not far away from\par
the proverbial \ldblquote man on the street\rdblquote  knowing the difference between a 72 percent\par
and a 66 percent chocolate. The boutique chocolate makers are now coming up\par
with estate and varietal and vintage chocolates. I love that, but honestly, once\par
you add enough sugar and cream to chocolate, those nuances are all gone.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
People always ask why I use bittersweet versus semisweet chocolate. Semisweet\par
is chocolate that needs salt. When you add salt to it, it brings up the bitter flavor\par
and makes it taste bittersweet. Semisweet chocolate to me tastes kind of flat.\par
Milk chocolate can taste flat as well. Now that there is Scharffen Berger and El\par
Rey on the market, I find both those chocolates to be really, really great, with\par
both flavor and kick to them. But if you want a killer chocolate dessert, don\rquote t use\par
milk chocolate.\par
When I write a dessert menu, there will be a couple of chocolate desserts, with\par
one being a killer chocolate and the other a lighter option, like chocolate with\par
bananas. If you don\rquote t have something intensely chocolate, chocolate lovers are\par
very, very unhappy. Banana souffl\'e9 with chocolate is not considered a chocolate\par
dessert. You have to be careful with a killer chocolate dessert \f2\emdash\f1  you can\rquote t just\par
put chocolate, chocolate, and chocolate together. There has to be balance so the\par
dessert is not too rich. To achieve balance, turn to coffee or caramel because they\par
pair so well and help to intensify the chocolate flavor.\par
For some desserts, I like to combine white and dark chocolate, or milk and\par
dark chocolate, to give balance and cut intensity. It sounds crazy, but you can use\par
one chocolate to mellow the flavor of another.\par
I\rquote m not a fan of herbs with dessert, with the possible exception of chocolate. I\par
love the combination of chocolate with mint.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
I don\rquote t have a big sweet tooth but I do like all kinds of chocolate, from dark to\par
white. Each one is completely different. I like the bitterness and clean flavor of\par
dark chocolate. I like milk chocolate with a piece of bread like when I was a kid.\par
You have to select your white chocolate carefully because not all of it is good.\par
White chocolate works well in a mousse; it has a more neutral flavor and does\par
not dictate. Dark chocolate is all about being the star, versus white, that is better\par
to play with.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dark chocolate goes really well with coffee or caramel, but if I could only pick\par
one it would be the caramel! Caramel and chocolate play so well together\par
despite both being strong flavors.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
game (e.g., rabbit, venison)\par
game birds\par
ginger\par
graham crackers\par
Grand Marnier\par
HAZELNUTS\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
lavender\par
lemon\par
liqueurs: berry, coffee (e.g., Kahl\'faa), nut (e.g., Frangelico), orange\par
macadamia nuts\par
malt (malted milk)\par
maple syrup\par
marshmallows\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
Mexican cuisine (e.g., mole sauces)\par
MILK\par
MINT\par
nutmeg, esp. on hot chocolate\par
NUTS\par
oats\par
orange: juice, zest\par
orange blossom water\par
passion fruit\par
peanuts/peanut butter\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, pink (pinch)\par
poultry\par
praline\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
RASPBERRIES, esp. with milk chocolate\par
Rice Krispies\par
RUM: DARK, LIGHT\par
salt\par
sauces: savory (e.g., mole), sweet (e.g., chocolate)\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, confectioners\rquote , white\par
tea, esp. green or Earl Grey\par
turkey\par
VANILLA\par
Vin Santo\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chocolate + almonds + cinnamon + sugar\par
chocolate + almonds + cream\par
chocolate + banana + butterscotch + macadamia nuts\par
chocolate + banana + caramel + cream + vanilla\par
chocolate + butterscotch + caramel + coffee\par
chocolate + caramel + coffee + malt\par
chocolate + caramel + coffee + praline\par
chocolate + caramel + cream + hazelnuts + vanilla\par
chocolate + cherries + mint\par
chocolate + cinnamon + chiles + nuts + seeds\par
chocolate + coffee + hazelnuts\par
chocolate + coffee + walnuts\par
chocolate + cream + raspberries\par
chocolate + custard + pistachios\par
chocolate + ginger + orange\par
chocolate + graham crackers + marshmallows\par
chocolate + hazelnuts + orange\par
chocolate + lavender + vanilla\par
chocolate + rum + vanilla\par
Dishes\par
Hot Valrhona Chocolate Souffl\'e9, Vermont Maple Ice Cream, Vanilla Ice\par
Cream, and Chocolate Sorbet \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Bouley (New York City)\par
Austrian Chocolate-Hazelnut Souffl\'e9 with Italian Plum Rago\'fbt and\par
Caramel Balsamic Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Danube (New York City)\par
Chocolate-Hazelnut Cake with Orange Sauce and Hazelnut Gelato \f2\emdash\f1  Gina\par
DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Almond and Chocolate Torte with Raspberries \f2\emdash\f1  Jim Dodge, at the 2005\par
James Beard Awards gala reception\par
Crunchy Chocolate-Hazelnut Spring Roll with Mint and Mango Salad \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Milk Chocolate and Orange Parfait with Steamed Meringues and Orange\par
and Black Truffle Brown Butter \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets\par
(Vancouver)\par
Chocolate-Hazelnut Mousse, Orange Sherbet, and Cardamom-Scented\par
Oranges \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru (Chicago)\par
Chocolate-Port Semifreddo with Chocolate-Port Bisque, Dark Chocolate\par
Sponge Cake, and Orange-Cinnamon Truffle \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru\par
(Chicago)\par
Dark Chocolate, Cashew, and Caramel Tart, with Red Wine Reduction,\par
Banana, and Malted Rum-Milk Chocolate Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis,\par
pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York City) Flourless Chocolate Cake, Dark\par
Chocolate Ganache, Toasted Bread, Maldon Sea Salt, Extra-Virgin Olive\par
Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York City) Warm El\par
Rey Chocolate Pudding Cake with Salted Peanut Ice Cream and Peanut\par
Brittle \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Bittersweet Chocolate Pot de Cr\'e8me with Coffee-Caramel Cream,\par
Butterscotch, and Chocolate Toffee \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon\par
(San Francisco)\par
Chocolate-Peanut Butter Cr\'e8me Caramel with Strauss Family Farms Ice\par
Milk \f2\emdash\f1  Ellie Nelson, pastry chef, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Our Marjolaine Cake: A Classic Chocolate-Hazelnut Meringue Layer Cake\par
with Raspberries \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington\par
(Washington, Virginia) Our Perennially Popular, Molten-Centered Chocolate\par
Cake with Roasted Banana Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little\par
Washington (Washington, Virginia) Chocolate Biscuit Souffl\'e9 with Dark\par
Chocolate Mousse and Milk Chocolate\f2\endash\f1 Ginger Parfait \f2\emdash\f1  Fran\'e7ois Payard,\par
Payard Patisserie and Bistro (New York City) Milk Chocolate Mousse, Yuzu\par
Citrus Cream, and Sacher Biscuit \f2\emdash\f1  Fran\'e7ois Payard, Payard Patisserie and\par
Bistro (New York City) Trio of Desserts: Creamy Chocolate-Cheese Flan\par
with Hibiscus Caramel, Chocolate Bread Pudding with Warm Caf\'e9 con\par
Leche Sauce, Mayan Mediterranean Chocolate Rice Pudding with\par
Cinnamon and Cacao Nib Dust \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New\par
Jersey)\par
Trio of Dark, White, and Gianduja Chocolate Mousses with an Espresso\par
Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Dark Chocolate\f2\endash\f1 Jalape\'f1o Ice Cream Sundae \f2\emdash\f1  Janos Wilder, Janos (Tucson)\par
I make a cake with dark cocoa, which makes for a bitter chocolate flavor, and\par
then in the middle a milk chocolate cream. Many people don\rquote t realize how great\par
the chocolate flavor of cocoa is. It adds bitterness and intensity without adding\par
richness. That is invaluable because so many chocolate desserts are so rich.\par
Often when I make a chocolate ice cream, I will combine melted chocolate and\par
cocoa.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
My dessert of milk chocolate pot de cr\'e8me, caramel foam, maple syrup, and\par
Maldon sea salt served in an emptied-out eggshell symbolizes that a few\par
ingredients can come together in a way that is greater than the sum of their parts.\par
The key ingredient which ties it together is the Maldon sea salt. This\par
combination elevates all the ingredients.\par
Starting with chocolate, caramel was the logical next step. At the time, I\par
played with fleur de sel, red salt from Hawaii, and others, before ending up with\par
the Maldon. I like the concept of using sugar as a seasoning, beyond its natural\par
necessity in dessert. I also like natural sweetness from things and maple sugar\par
brings a lot of flavor beyond sweetness. Once I hit upon this combination, I have\par
never changed it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Creamy White Chocolate and Cranberry Risotto with Roasted Apricots \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
White Chocolate and Rice Milk Flan with Pistachio Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique\par
and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Valrhona and El Rey are both good. When you are looking for a white\par
chocolate, you want one that has some smoothness to it. It is not going to have\par
the acidity that dark chocolate has. When you are making a dessert with white\par
chocolate, it is going to be a softer, smoother dessert. I don\rquote t like dark chocolate\par
and raspberries together, but I believe I am one of the few chefs who feel this\par
way. What I don\rquote t like is that when you take a bite of the chocolate with the\par
berry, the acidity of the two don\rquote t blend. The acids are too similar, so it doesn\rquote t\par
feel like a single dessert in your mouth. Instead, it is a clash with both of them\par
bouncing into each other in your mouth. They don\rquote t bridge, and even whipped\par
cream doesn\rquote t bring them together. But if you use white chocolate, its softness\par
works much better with berries. The white chocolate complements the berries\par
and brings out their flavors. Citrus, especially anything in the orange family, also\par
works well with white chocolate. Nuts, such as almonds, work well with white\par
chocolate. Spices also work well with white chocolate.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
CHOCOLATE, WHITE\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
basil\par
BERRIES: blackberries, blueberries, cranberries\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
cassis\par
cherries\par
chocolate, esp. dark\par
citrus\par
coconut\par
cream\par
dates\par
figs\par
ginger\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime\par
liqueurs: berry, cr\'e8me de cacao\par
macadamia nuts\par
mango\par
mint\par
orange\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
persimmons\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
prunes\par
*RASPBERRIES\par
rum\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
white chocolate + basil + strawberries\par
white chocolate + cream + lemon + orange\par
white chocolate + dark chocolate + pistachios\par
white chocolate + ginger + pistachios + rice\par
CHORIZO (See also Sausages)\par
Taste: salty; spicy\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: saut\'e9, stew\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
beans\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
chicken\par
chili\par
clams\par
garlic\par
hard cider\par
herbs\par
kale\par
monkfish\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paprika\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
Spanish cuisine\par
stews\par
stock, chicken\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
AVOID\par
delicate fish (e.g., halibut, scallops)\par
oily fish (e.g., sardines)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chorizo + clam broth + herbs + monkfish\par
CHRISTMAS\par
baked goods, esp. cookies\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
eggnog\par
fruitcake\par
ginger\par
peppermint\par
CILANTRO\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
Weight: light, soft-leaved\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Always use fresh, not cooked \f2\emdash\f1  or, if you must, add at the very last\par
minute.\par
Use cilantro to provide a cooling note to chile pepper\f2\endash\f1  spiced dishes.\par
After a visit to Spain, I created a chorizo broth to go with monkfish. I love\par
chorizo, with its paprika flavors and the fattiness of the pork. So I had to figure\par
out how to make a sauce out of a dried piece of sausage. We melted the chorizo\par
in a pan for a long time, and ended up with a flavorful grease that was not that\par
appealing. However, we emulsified it in an herb-infused clam broth, and it\par
became velvety. It wasn\rquote t greasy, and gave the sauce a little kick. I chose this\par
sauce to go with monkfish because it is a meaty fish and can stand up to spice\par
and to strong flavors really well. Chorizo would not destroy the soul of the fish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Pan-roasted Monkfish with Confit Peppers and Fiery \ldblquote Patatas Bravas\rdblquote  with\par
Chorizo-Albarino Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Asian cuisines\par
avocados\par
basil\par
beans\par
bell peppers\par
boar, wild\par
braised dishes\par
butter\par
cardamom\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
CHILE PEPPERS\par
chives\par
chutneys\par
coconut and coconut milk (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
corn\par
cream and ice cream\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curries, esp. Indian\par
dill\par
dips\par
figs\par
fish, white (e.g., cod, halibut)\par
garam masala (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens\par
INDIAN CUISINE\par
lamb\par
Latin American cuisines\par
legumes\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
meats, esp. white\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
MEXICAN CUISINE\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
North African cuisine\par
onions, red\par
I like the anise-seed quality to cilantro, which is really good with figs.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I really like using cilantro for its lemony and floral qualities, even though it\rquote s\par
very non-European. I\rquote ll put cilantro stems [not the leaves] in the cavity when I\rquote m\par
roasting a chicken, and I find it lifts the flavor. Cilantro stems are also wonderful\par
in Spanish-themed stews when there\rquote s a lot of depth of flavor from ingredients\par
like chorizo, chickpeas, oxtails, or tripe, and it needs a high note.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Love it or hate it, cilantro is in a lot of my dishes! I love its citrus flavor.\par
Cilantro has long legs; we use it to make cilantro oil as well as purees. It lends\par
itself well to white meats but I have even put it on hanger steak and wild boar. I\par
also like it with coconut milk.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
orange, juice\par
parsley\par
pork\par
Portuguese cuisine\par
potatoes\par
rice, esp. Indian\par
salads, esp. Asian\par
SALSAS, MEXICAN\par
sauces\par
scallions\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
stir-fried dishes\par
tamarind\par
Tex-Mex cuisine\par
Thai cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinaigrettes, esp. red wine\par
vinegar, red wine\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
Japanese cuisine (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cilantro + chile peppers + coconut milk\par
cilantro + dill + mint\par
cilantro + garlic + ginger\par
CINNAMON\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet, bitter, pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add early in cooking.\par
allspice\par
APPLES: CIDER, FRUIT, JUICE\par
apricots\par
baked dishes and goods\par
bananas\par
beef, esp. braised, raw, stewed\par
bell peppers\par
berries\par
beverages, esp. hot\par
blueberries\par
breads, sweet (e.g., gingerbread)\par
breakfast / brunch\par
butter\par
caramel\par
Calvados\par
cardamom\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
Chinese cuisine\par
CHOCOLATE / COCOA\par
chutneys\par
cloves\par
coffee / espresso\par
cloves (compatible spice)\par
cookies\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream cheese\par
cumin\par
curries, esp. Indian\par
CUSTARDS\par
DESSERTS\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
five-spice powder (key ingredient)\par
French toast\par
fruits: fruit compotes, fruit desserts\par
game birds\par
garam masala, Indian (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
holiday cooking\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lamb, esp. braised\par
lemon, juice\par
mace\par
malt\par
maple syrup\par
meats, red\par
Mediterreanean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mole sauces\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
I use Saigon cinnamon that is the most amazing cinnamon you will ever try. It\par
comes in a chip [as opposed to a stick] and is like the cinnamon used to make\par
red-hots [candy]. I use it in a ganache.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, JEAN GEORGES (NEW YORK CITY)\par
onions\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pancakes\par
pastries\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pies\par
plums\par
pork\par
poultry\par
pumpkin\par
quail\par
quatre \'e9pices (key ingredient)\par
raisins\par
ras el hanout (key ingredient)\par
rice\par
saffron\par
sauces (e.g., barbecue)\par
South American cuisine\par
Southeast Asian cuisine (as cassia)\par
Spanish cuisine\par
squash, esp. winter\par
star anise\par
stews\par
stocks and broths\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tagines\par
tamarind\par
tea\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. sweet\par
waffles\par
walnuts\par
wine, red, esp. mulled\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cinnamon + almonds + raisins\par
cinnamon + cardamom + cloves + coriander + black pepper (garam masala)\par
cinnamon + cardamom + rice\par
cinnamon + cloves + mace + nutmeg\par
CITRUS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also Lemons, Limes, Oranges,\par
etc.)\par
Season: winter\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: medium\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
fish\par
Greek cuisine\par
lemongrass\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
salads: green, fruit\par
shellfish\par
Dishes\par
Lemongrass Sorbet, Dehydrated Grapefruit, Crispy Tangerine, Lime Curd\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Johnny Iuzzini, pastry chef, Jean Georges (New York City) CLAMS\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, grill, roast, saut\'e9, steam, stew\par
aioli\par
allspice\par
anchovy\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
BACON\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bread, esp. French\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
cabbage, esp. napa\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chervil\par
CHILE PEPPERS, esp. dried and red (e.g., habanero, jalape\'f1o)\par
chili powder\par
chives\par
chorizo\par
cilantro\par
clam juice\par
cocktail sauce\par
cod\par
Orange is the leading lady of citrus \f2\emdash\f1  it brings a sunny, citric flavor to dishes.\par
Lemon and lime are the men of citrus \f2\emdash\f1  very strong, so use them carefully!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I love candied citrus for savory dishes. I love candied kumquats, orange, or\par
lemon. They are great with sweet or savory dishes, and amazing with cheese,\par
such as a soft, non-ashed goat cheese.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, NAHA (CHICAGO)\par
corn\par
cream\par
cumin\par
fennel\par
fermented black beans\par
fish, esp. striped bass\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
gingko nuts\par
ham, Serrano\par
hominy\par
horseradish\par
Italian cuisine\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
marjoram\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
milk\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
mustard greens\par
New England cuisine\par
oil, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions, esp. red or Spanish\par
oregano\par
oysters\par
pancetta\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
Dishes\par
Linguine with Clams, Pancetta, and Hot Chiles \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New\par
York City)\par
Clam Chowder with Smoked Bacon\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Rebecca Charles, Pearl Oyster Bar (New York City)\par
New New England Clam Chowder Served with Cream of Bacon, Onion\par
Jam, and Chive Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Katsuya Fukushima, Caf\'e9 Atl\'e1ntico / minibar\par
(Washington, DC) Braised Manila Clams, Italian Sausage, and White Beans\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
Pernod\par
pork\par
POTATOES, esp. Idaho, red\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice, esp. Arborio or bomba\par
romesco sauce\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sake\par
salt, kosher\par
sausage, esp. spicy (e.g., chorizo)\par
scallions\par
scallops (compatible seafood)\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry (e.g., fino)\par
shiso leaf\par
shrimp (compatible seafood)\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squid (compatible seafood)\par
stocks: chicken, clam, fish\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tapenade\par
tarragon\par
Thai basil\par
THYME\par
TOMATOES, esp. plum, roasted, sauce\par
vermouth\par
WINE, DRY WHITE (e.g., Champagne, Pinot Gris, Tocai Friulano,\par
Sauvignon Blanc)\par
yuzu juice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
clams + aioli + capers + tarragon\par
clams + bacon + lemon + scallions\par
clams + basil + garlic + tomatoes\par
clams + butter + lemon + shallots\par
clams + cream + curry + fennel\par
clams + garlic + mussels + onion + thyme + white wine\par
clams + oysters + potatoes + thyme\par
CLOVES\par
Taste: sweet, pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: Add early in cooking.\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples: cider, fruit, juice\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, cakes, pastries, pies)\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
beets\par
beverages\par
biryani\par
cabbage, esp. red\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chocolate\par
cider, hot (i.e., mulled)\par
cinnamon\par
cookies\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curries (e.g., Asian, Indian)\par
desserts\par
duck\par
English cuisine\par
fennel seeds\par
fruits, esp. cooked\par
game\par
garam masala (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
ginger\par
ham, baked\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine, esp. northern\par
ketchup\par
kumquats\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
mace\par
meats\par
Mexican cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
orange\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
salad dressings\par
sausage\par
spice cakes\par
squash\par
Sri Lankan cuisine\par
star anise\par
stews\par
stock, esp. beef\par
stuffing\par
sweet potatoes\par
Szechuan pepper\par
tamarind\par
tea\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vegetables, sweet\par
walnuts\par
wine, red, hot (i.e., mulled)\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cloves + cardamom + cinnamon + tea\par
cloves + cinnamon + ginger + nutmeg\par
cloves + ginger + honey\par
COCONUT AND COCONUT MILK\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: stir-fry\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
Asian cuisine\par
bananas\par
basil\par
beans, green (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
beef\par
blackberries\par
Brazilian cuisine\par
candies\par
caramel\par
cardamom (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
cashews (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
cauliflower (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
cherries, fresh or dried\par
chicken (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
chile peppers, green or red\par
chili powder\par
chocolate, esp. dark or white\par
cilantro (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
curries (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
eggs\par
figs, dried\par
fish\par
fruit, esp. tropical\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
guava\par
honey\par
My coconut rice pudding strudel was the result of Takashi\rquote s influence. [Takashi\par
Yagihashi was his chef at Detroit\rquote s Tribute restaurant.] Dessert has to make sense\par
in the context of the rest of the meal. Being a pastry chef is exciting because you\par
have a lot of autonomy, but you are still working within the chef\rquote s framework.\par
Takashi\rquote s food was very Asian-influenced. This dish was meant to bring in Asian\par
ingredients in a new way yet be something familiar.\par
So we have rice pudding flavored with coconut, lemongrass, ginger, and\par
vanilla, and diced apricot for texture. At the time I was introduced to frie de\par
brique, which is a Moroccan dough that is like a cross between phyllo and a\par
wonton wrapper. I would wrap these ingredients in this dough and then saut\'e9\par
them in clarified butter and slice them like a spring roll. Alongside I served\par
green tea ice cream. This covered a lot of bases for me: the warm and cold\par
temperatures, the Asian influence, and doing something with boring old rice\par
pudding.\par
The coolest compliment I ever got was from Andrew Carmellini [chef of New\par
York\rquote s A Voce] who was sitting down with us and asked about my background.\par
When I said I used to be a line cook, he said, \ldblquote I knew it \f2\emdash\f1  a pastry chef would\par
never come up with that!\rdblquote  It was the combination of techniques and flavors as\par
well as saut\'e9ing something to order.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Ice Wine\f2\endash\f1 Lychee Gel\'e9e with Coconut Milk Sabayon and Pumpkin Seed\par
Croquant \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Coconut Cr\'e8me Br\'fbl\'e9e with Lychee Sorbet and Sesame Tuile \f2\emdash\f1  Brad\par
Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Lemongrass and Coconut Panna Cotta\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Nora Pouillon, Asia Nora (Washington, DC)\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
kiwi\par
kumquats\par
lamb (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lentils (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
lime, juice\par
lychee\par
macadamia nuts\par
Malaysian cuisine\par
mangoes\par
maple\par
mascarpone\par
milk\par
mint (e.g., Indian cuisine, etc.)\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
orange, juice\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
peanuts\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
pistachios\par
rice\par
rose water\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salads, fruit\par
salmon (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
salt, kosher\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish: shrimp, lobster\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
stews\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea, green\par
Thai cuisine\par
tropical fruits\par
VANILLA\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinegar, white wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
coconut + apricot + ginger + green tea + lemongrass + rice + vanilla\par
coconut + honey + lime\par
coconut + lemongrass + vanilla\par
coconut + orange + vanilla\par
coconut milk + beef + ginger\par
COD\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, boil, broil, cakes, deep-fry, fry, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9,\par
steam\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: cannellini, green, navy, white\par
bell peppers: red, green, yellow\par
bouquet garni\par
brandade\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
cabbage, savoy\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese: Emmental, Gruy\'e8re, Swiss\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cream\par
currants\par
daikon\par
eggplant, esp. Japanese\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
endive\par
English cuisine, esp. fish and chips\par
fennel\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
ham: cured, Serrano\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
milk\par
miso\par
mushrooms, esp. cepes, portobello, shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
New England cuisine\par
oils: canola, corn, grapeseed, peanut\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, green\par
onions\par
orange: juice, zest\par
paprika, sweet\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
POTATOES, esp. red, red bliss\par
prosciutto\par
radishes\par
risotto\par
Dishes\par
Ceviche Fronterizo: Lime-Marinated Alaskan True Cod with Vine-Ripe\par
Tomatoes, Olives, Cilantro, and Green Chile, Served on Crispy Tostaditas\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Alaskan True Cod and Fresh-Shucked Oysters in Tamazula-Sparked\par
Homemade Cocktail Sauce with Lime, Avocado, White Onion, and Cilantro\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Chatham Bay Codfish: Chanterelle Mushrooms, Sweet Peas, and Tarragon\par
Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Upstairs (New York City)\par
Atlantic Cod \ldblquote au Naturel\rdblquote  with Littleneck Clams; Roasted Artichokes,\par
Swiss Chard, and Lemon Marmalade \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York\par
City)\par
Roast Cod on Edamame Risotto with Salt and Pepper Sepia and CarrotYuzu Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Brad Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Brioche-Crusted Cod with Baby Artichokes, Oven-Dried Tomatoes, Garlic\par
Mashed Potatoes, and Artichoke Puree \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Kinkead\rquote s\par
(Washington, DC)\par
Cod Baked in a Salt Crust Stuffed with Baby Artichokes, Romesco, Red\par
Wine, Olive, and Preserved Tomato Stew \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New\par
York City)\par
Cod is an undervalued fish. It\rquote s light, flaky, and delicate, and I especially like it\par
served with broths or chowders. It\rquote s also great baked for ten minutes on salt on a\par
sheet tray. Cod pairs well with clams and shellfish, and I love the combination of\par
fresh cod with salted cod in a dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt:fleur de sel,kosher, sea\par
sauces: hollandaise, tartar, tomato\par
sausage, chorizo\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shellfish: clams, shrimp\par
stocks: chicken, fish, mussels, veal, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles, black\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, red wine, sherry, tarragon, white wine\par
wine: dry white, red\par
yuzu juice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cod + capers + chives + lentils + potatoes\par
cod + cepes (mushrooms) + garlic + lemon + potatoes\par
COD, BLACK\par
bell peppers, red\par
chile peppers, esp. red\par
chives\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
leeks\par
miso\par
onions\par
shiso\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
sugar, brown\par
COD, SALT\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
artichoke hearts\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
bread crumbs\par
capers\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
GARLIC\par
greens, salad\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
Dishes\par
Black Cod with Miso Sauce\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Nobu Matsuhisa, Nobu (New York City)\par
Broiled Sake-Marinated Alaskan Black Cod and Shrimp Dumplings in\par
Shiso Broth \f2\emdash\f1  Hiro Sone, Terra (St. Helena, California)\par
Warm Salad of Poached Salt Cod, Porcini Mushrooms, and Yukon Golds \f2\emdash\f1\par
David Pasternak, Esca (New York City)\par
Old Bay seasoning\par
OIL, canola\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. black or kalamata\par
onions\par
paprika: hot, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
saffron\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
sour cream\par
stock, fish\par
sugar\par
Tabasco sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar: red wine, white wine\par
wine, dry\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
Flavor Affinities\par
salt cod + bay leaf + thyme + white wine vinegar\par
COFFEE AND ESPRESSO\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
amaretto\par
anise\par
bananas\par
barbecue sauce\par
beverages\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cheese, ricotta\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chicory\par
CHOCOLATE, ESP. DARK, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
COCOA\par
coconut\par
cognac\par
CREAM\par
curry\par
custards\par
dates\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
game birds\par
gravy\par
ham (e.g., with red-eye gravy)\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream, vanilla\par
Irish whiskey\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
lime\par
liqueurs, coffee (e.g., Kahl\'faa, T\'eda Maria)\par
macadamia nuts\par
maple syrup\par
milk, including sweetened, condensed\par
nutmeg\par
NUTS\par
oats\par
orange\par
pears\par
pecans\par
persimmons\par
pork\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
rum\par
star anise\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
VANILLA\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
AVOID\par
lavender\par
Flavor Affinities\par
coffee + bourbon + cream\par
coffee + caramel + chocolate\par
coffee + cinnamon + cloves + orange\par
coffee + cinnamon + cream + lemon + sugar\par
coffee + mascarpone + rum + sugar + vanilla\par
COGNAC\par
apples and apple cider\par
beef (e.g., filet mignon)\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
cream\par
foie gras\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
pepper: black, green\par
pork\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, cider\par
Dishes\par
Espresso Cupcakes Filled with Milk Chocolate Ganache and White\par
Chocolate Frosting \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Bourbon Ice Cream on Coffee-Flavored Tapioca in a Martini Glass \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz\par
Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
In addition to seasonality, I always pay attention to temperature. I look at what I\par
feel like eating now given that day\rquote s weather. If it is cold and raining, I make\par
sure soup is on the menu.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
COLDNESS (of indoor or outdoor temperature; See also Winter)\par
braised dishes\par
butter and butter-based sauces and dishes\par
cheese and cheese dishes\par
cream and cream-based sauces and dishes\par
grains, heavy\par
hot dishes and beverages\par
meats, esp. red\par
polenta\par
risotto\par
soups, hot and hearty\par
spices, warming\par
stews and stewed dishes\par
COLLARD GREENS (See Greens, Collard)\par
COOLING\par
Function: Ingredients believed to have cooling properties; useful in hot\par
weather.\par
asparagus\par
avocados\par
berries\par
buttermilk\par
cucumbers\par
figs, fresh\par
fruits, esp. sweet (e.g., cherries, grapes)\par
herbs, cooling (e.g., cilantro, honeysuckle, lavender, lemon balm, mint,\par
peppermint)\par
lettuce\par
melon\par
salads\par
spices, cooling (e.g., cardamom, coriander, fennel)\par
water\par
watercress\par
watermelon\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cucumbers + mint + yogurt\par
CORIANDER\par
Taste: sour, pungent, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add near the end of cooking.\par
Toast coriander seeds to release their flavor.\par
allspice\par
anise\par
apples\par
baked goods (e.g., cakes, cookies, pies)\par
basil\par
beans\par
beef\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers (e.g., fresh green)\par
chili\par
chutneys\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus and citrus zest\par
cloves\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
corn\par
crab, esp. boiled\par
cumin\par
curries (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
curry powder\par
desserts\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
fruits, esp. autumn and dried\par
garam masala (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
gingerbread\par
grapefruit\par
ham\par
harissa (key ingredient)\par
hot dogs\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
Latin American cuisine\par
lentils\par
mace\par
meats\par
Mediterreanean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
My personal preference for the ratio of coriander to cumin is three-quarters of a\par
portion of coriander to one portion of cumin.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MEERA DHALWALA, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
I\rquote ll use coriander with peppercorns in a sachet for soups, with the pepper\par
providing the heat and the coriander more of a fruity note.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
North African cuisine\par
North American cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pastries\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
pickles\par
plums\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
quince\par
rice (e.g., as pudding)\par
saffron\par
salmon\par
sausages\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. cream-based\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
spinach\par
stews (e.g., chicken)\par
stocks (e.g., fish)\par
stuffing\par
sugar\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
turkey\par
turmeric\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
coriander + cardamom + cinnamon + clove\par
coriander + cayenne + cumin + garlic\par
coriander + chile peppers + mustard + black pepper\par
coriander + cumin + curry\par
coriander + fish + garlic + olive oil + tomatoes\par
CORN\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, grill, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
bacon\par
BASIL: sweet, lemon\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. lima\par
b\'e9chamel sauce\par
beef\par
BELL PEPPERS: red, green\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
buttermilk\par
caraway seed\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese: cheddar, Colby, Cotija, feta, Monterey Jack\par
chervil\par
CHILE PEPPERS: chipotle, jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
chili powder\par
chili sauce\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
corn\par
cornmeal\par
crab\par
CREAM, esp. heavy\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
eggs\par
fava beans\par
fennel\par
fish, salmon\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
ham\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon thyme\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
lovage\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
Mexican cuisine\par
milk\par
mirepoix\par
MUSHROOMS, esp. chanterelle, oyster, shiitake, other wild\par
mustard\par
New England cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, peanut, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
ONIONS: red, Spanish, yellow\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
pesto\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
risottos\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads, green\par
salmon\par
salsas\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry\par
shiso\par
Southern cuisine\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
squash, esp. summer\par
star anise\par
STOCKS: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tortillas, corn\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: cider, white wine\par
wine, dry white\par
We participate in an event called \ldblquote Plate and Pitchfork\rdblquote  that is held on a farm\par
with the food from the farm. The guests sit in the field among the corn and\par
tomatoes, and we cook a meal for them on a couple of grills. I made a corn soup\par
for this event. We removed the husks, then cut the kernels off the cob. Then we\par
used the husks, which produce a juice, to make a stock for the soup. If you were\par
to use cobs, you wouldn\rquote t get the same flavor. It is important to keep the corn\par
flavor pure. Most cooks would throw in a bunch of vegetables in the stock, and\par
what you\rquote d get then is a vegetable stock with corn. I want to have a corny flavor\par
in the end. We made a stock using the corn husks cooked with a little onion,\par
water, and salt, and let it cook for about 45 minutes. What came out was the\par
most amazing sweet broth. We added the corn, pureed it, and served it chilled. It\par
was so sweet and full of corn flavor you would have sworn there were cream and\par
sugar in it.\par
We now make a corn husk broth to add to a corn, chanterelle, and Dungeness\par
crab risotto with a touch of pesto. Basil pesto and corn really speaks to me. It is a\par
wonderful combination.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VITALY PALEY, PALEY\rquote S PLACE (PORTLAND, OREGON)\par
To intensify the flavor of corn in a dish, add [corn] juice. I\rquote ll make a corn ravioli\par
with pureed corn and cooked corn. I add corn juice to the filling to add a fresh\par
corn flavor to the ravioli.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Homemade Corn and Leek Ravioli with Maine Lobster and Silver Queen\par
Local Corn \f2\emdash\f1  Lidia Bastianich, Felidia (New York City)\par
Baby Corn on the Cob, Brown Butter Powder, Cilantro Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Brad\par
Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Arepas de Choclo: Corn Cakes Topped with Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche and Salmon\par
Roe \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Red Bliss Potato and Corn Pizza, Parsley Pesto, and Smoked Cow\rquote s Milk\par
Cheese \f2\emdash\f1  Cory Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
corn + bell pepper + jalape\'f1o chile + cilantro + tarragon\par
corn + butter + salt\par
corn + cayenne + lime + salt\par
corn + cilantro + shrimp\par
CORNED BEEF (See Beef \f2\emdash\f1  Brisket)\par
CORNISH GAME HENS\par
cardamom\par
cayenne\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cumin, esp. toasted\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
oil, canola\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pepper, black\par
salt\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
turmeric\par
yogurt\par
COUSCOUS\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: steep\par
African (North) cuisine\par
apricots, dried\par
basil\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
fish (e.g., snapper)\par
ginger\par
lemon: juice, preserved, zest\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
raisins\par
saffron\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sausage, merguez\par
scallions\par
stocks: chicken, fish, vegetable,\par
tomatoes and tomato juice\par
turnips\par
zucchini\par
COUSCOUS, ISRAELI\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: light\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
olive oil\par
pepper, white\par
pesto\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
CRAB\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, boil, broil, grill, steam\par
aioli\par
apples\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
*AVOCADOS\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, esp. green, red, yellow\par
bread crumbs / panko\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots and carrot juice\par
cauliflower\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
celery salt\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: jalape\'f1o, Scotch bonnet pepper, Thai\par
chili sauce\par
Chinese cuisine\par
CHIVES\par
cilantro\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
coriander\par
corn\par
crab roe\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
Dishes\par
Jumbo Lump Crab Salad with Asparagus, Mustard Seed Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud/Olivier Muller, DB Bistro (New York City)\par
Crab Salad with White Asparagus, Ginger, Lime, Pistachio Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud/Bertrand Chemel, Caf\'e9 Boulud (New York City) Marinated Jumbo\par
Lump Crabmeat with Horseradish, Coriander, Tomato, Seaweed Salad, and\par
Ginger Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Jeffrey Buben, Vidalia (Washington, DC)\par
Red and Yellow Tomato Gazpacho with Avocado Puree and Lump\par
Crabmeat, with Microgreen Salad \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Iacovone, Cuv\'e9e (New Orleans)\par
A M\'e9lange of Jumbo Lump Crab, Mango, and Avocado in a Tropical Fruit\par
Coulis \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington,\par
Virginia) Signature Sushi: Blue Crab with Celery and Red Bell Pepper \f2\emdash\f1\par
Kaz Okoshi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Potato Gnocchi with Oregon Dungeness Crab and Preserved Lemon \f2\emdash\f1\par
Vitaly Paley, Paley\rquote s Place (Portland, Oregon)\par
Spicy Crab and Peanut Soup with Okra\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Crab Cake with Saffron-Sherry Aioli\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Dungeness Crab and Potato Cakes, Green Beans, Cucumbers, Almonds,\par
and Shaved Fennel \f2\emdash\f1  Cory Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
Michael Dean\rquote s Squash Blossom, Crabmeat, and Squash with Green\par
Tomato Relish \f2\emdash\f1  Frank Stitt, Highlands Bar and Grill (Birmingham, Alabama)\par
I\rquote ll never forget tasting the combination of crab, avocado, and almonds at chef\par
Pascal Barbot\rquote s Paris restaurant L\rquote Astrance.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Crab is something that you typically see steamed and served with butter. King\par
crab is intensely flavorful, meaty, and salty. When it is caught at sea, it is cooked\par
on the boat with heavily salted water. The first thing I did was soak the crab\par
multiple times in ice water to draw out all the salt. I saw and created a vision of\par
this red crabmeat within a barigoule with perfectly cut vegetables, artichokes,\par
French green beans, Valencia oranges, sweet garlic, and finished with olive oil.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, Naha (Chicago)\par
When making crab cakes, I\rquote ll use whole shrimp \f2\emdash\f1  the meat in the cakes, and\par
the shrimp heads in the sauce \f2\emdash\f1  to intensify the shellfish flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
curry\par
custard\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
endive, Belgian\par
fennel\par
fish: pike, sole\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lemon thyme\par
lime: juice, zest\par
lobster\par
mango\par
mascarpone\par
MAYONNAISE\par
melon: cantaloupe, honeydew\par
mint\par
mushrooms (e.g., button, cremini, shiitakes)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard powder\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
Old Bay seasoning\par
ONIONS: green, red, spring, sweet, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
paprika, esp. sweet\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
peas, green\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
ponzu sauce\par
potatoes\par
radishes\par
saffron\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry\par
shiso\par
SHRIMP\par
snow peas\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
tartar sauce\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES: fresh, sun-dried\par
vinaigrette, esp. citrus\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, red wine, sherry\par
watercress\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
crab + aioli + cilantro + jalape\'f1o chile\par
crab + almonds + avocado\par
crab + avocado + cilantro + mango\par
crab + avocado + grapefruit\par
crab + corn + green tomatoes\par
crab + cucumber + lime + mint\par
crab + ginger + lime\par
crab + lime + mint\par
crab + mango + raspberry vinegar\par
crab + black pepper + snow peas\par
crab + saffron + shallots\par
CRAB, SOFT-SHELL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: deep-fry, grill, pan roast, saut\'e9, tempura\par
almonds\par
arrowroot\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bell peppers, red\par
broccoli rabe\par
brown butter sauce\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
capers\par
cayenne\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chili powder\par
chives\par
coleslaw\par
couscous, Israeli\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
daikon\par
dill\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
ginger (e.g., pickled)\par
grapefruit\par
leeks\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lime: juice, zest\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms (e.g., shiitakes)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nori\par
OIL: canola, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
orange, juice\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas, sugar\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pesto\par
potatoes, esp. new\par
r\'e9moulade sauce\par
sake\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
shiso leaf\par
shrimp\par
sorrel\par
soy sauce\par
stock, fish\par
Tabasco sauce\par
Dishes\par
Black and White Fettuccini with Oven-Dried Tomatoes, Almond Pesto,\par
Calamari, and Crisp Soft-Shell Crab \f2\emdash\f1  Lidia Bastianich, Felidia (New York\par
City)\par
Crispy Thai-Style Soft-Shell Crab with Green Papaya Salad and Lime\par
Dipping Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Kinkead\rquote s (Washington, DC)\par
Pecan-Crusted Soft-Shell Crab Tempura with Italian Mustard Fruit \f2\emdash\f1\par
Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) SoftShell Crab: Sweet Corn, Potatoes, Leeks, Spring Onions, Caper\f2\endash\f1 White\par
Wine Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Chesapeake Bay Soft-Shell Crabs with Young Ginger and Chinese Chive\par
Coulis \f2\emdash\f1  David Waltuck, Chanterelle (New York City)\par
tarragon, fresh\par
tartar sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, white wine\par
wine, dry white\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
soft-shell crab + arugula + tartar sauce\par
soft-shell crab + asparagus + capers + garlic + lemon + potatoes\par
soft-shell crab + broccoli rabe + brown butter\par
soft-shell crab + cabbage + mustard\par
soft-shell crab + lemon + parsley\par
soft-shell crab + orange + parsley\par
CRANBERRIES\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 midwinter\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: boil\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
baked goods\par
cheese, goat\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
currants\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
lime, zest\par
liqueur, orange (e.g., Grand Marnier)\par
maple syrup\par
nuts\par
oats\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper\par
pistachios\par
pork\par
poultry\par
pumpkin\par
raisins\par
quince\par
salt\par
star anise\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tangerines\par
thyme\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
wine, white\par
CRAYFISH (aka crawfish)\par
Season: spring\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, broil, steam\par
asparagus\par
avocados\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
butter\par
Cajun cuisine\par
carrots and carrot juice\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cream / milk\par
Creole cuisine\par
dill\par
egg yolks\par
endive\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
leeks\par
mango\par
mayonnaise\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms, morels\par
mustard\par
oil, grapeseed\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
radishes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salt\par
shallots\par
sorrel\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar: tarragon, white wine\par
wine, dry white (e.g., white Burgundy)\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
crayfish + asparagus + morel mushrooms\par
crayfish + carrot juice + orange juice\par
Dishes\par
Crayfish, Beet, Leek, and Bacon Salad with Mustard Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud, at the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception CREAM\par
When you eat a piece of pumpkin pie, the whipped cream is the first thing you\par
go for! You can take this for granted in desserts, or you can dig deeper: You can\par
think of cream as its own flavor. When I was in Japan, the cream was miles\par
better than here in the U.S. You also need to think about your dairy choice in\par
relation to the country. In India, everything is centered around reduced milk. The\par
counterpart would be dolce de leche in Latin cuisine. I love yogurt because it is\par
simple and complex; it can be in the forefront or in the background.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
CREAM CHEESE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
berries\par
blueberries\par
bread, esp. fruit\par
breakfast / brunch\par
cheese: fresh goat, ricotta\par
cherries\par
cloves\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
desserts\par
eggs\par
fruit, dried\par
ginger\par
graham cracker crumbs\par
honey\par
kiwi fruit\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
liqueur, orange (e.g., Grand Marnier)\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
nutmeg\par
orange, juice\par
quince paste\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
salt (pinch)\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cream cheese + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + orange + sugar + vanilla\par
cream cheese + maple syrup + mascarpone\par
CREAM, SOUR (See Sour Cream)\par
CR\'c8ME FRA\'eeCHE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
apples\par
caramel\par
French cuisine\par
fruit, fresh\par
potatoes\par
raspberries\par
sauces\par
strawberries\par
sugar, brown\par
CREOLE CUISINE\par
bouillabaisse\par
cayenne\par
crawfish\par
okra\par
onions\par
oysters\par
paprika\par
pepper: black, white\par
salt\par
seafood\par
shrimp r\'e9moulade\par
CRESS (See Watercress)\par
CUBAN CUISINE\par
allspice\par
avocado\par
bay leaf\par
beans\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
citrus (e.g., lime, orange)\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
lime\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. white\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
pineapple\par
plantains\par
pork\par
rice\par
seafood (crab, fish, lobster, shrimp)\par
sugar, white\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
allspice + cumin + garlic + orange juice + pork\par
avocado + onions + pineapple + watercress\par
bay leaf + green bell peppers + garlic + onions + oregano (aka safrito)\par
chocolate + garlic + olive oil\par
citrus juice + garlic + olive oil (aka adobo)\par
Your choice of sugar suggests a country of origin. For example, Cuban cuisine\par
relies on white sugar, while Mexican cuisine relies on brown sugar.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARICEL PRESILLA, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
CUCUMBERS\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: pickle, raw, salads, saut\'e9, soups\par
allspice\par
bell peppers, esp. green\par
basil\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
caraway seeds\par
cayenne\par
celery and celery seeds\par
cheese: blue, feta\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: fresh green, jalape\'f1o\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
DILL\par
fish\par
fish sauce, Thai or other Asian\par
fris\'e9e\par
garam masala\par
GARLIC\par
gin\par
Greek cuisine\par
horseradish\par
Japanese cuisine\par
jicama\par
lemon balm\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
melon, esp. honeydew\par
MINT (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, esp. green or red\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts\par
pepper: black, white\par
pineapple\par
romaine\par
red pepper flakes\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
smoked salmon\par
soups, chilled (e.g., gazpacho)\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
sprouts\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamari\par
tarragon\par
tea sandwiches\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, rice wine, sherry,\par
tarragon, white wine\par
vodka\par
watercress\par
wine, white\par
YOGURT (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cucumber + chervil + salt + vinegar\par
cucumber + chile peppers + mint + yogurt\par
cucumber + cilantro + ginger + sugar + rice vinegar\par
cucumber + dill + red onion + sour cream + vinegar\par
cucumber + dill + salmon\par
cucumber + dill + yogurt\par
cucumber + feta cheese + garlic + mint + olive oil + oregano + red wine\par
vinegar\par
cucumber + garlic + mint + yogurt\par
cucumber + lemon + sesame oil + vinegar\par
cucumber + jalape\'f1o chile + dill + onion\par
cucumber + mint + yogurt\par
CUMIN\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add early in the cooking process.\par
Toast cumin seeds in a dry pan to evaporate their moisture and increase\par
their flavor.\par
allspice\par
anise\par
apples\par
baked goods (e.g., breads)\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. black or kidney\par
beef\par
beets\par
bread (e.g., rye)\par
cabbage\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
With lighter dishes like rice pilaf or lentils, I use cumin seeds for their gentler\par
flavor. With heavier dishes like chickpeas, kidney beans, or red meat, I\rquote ll use the\par
stronger-flavored cumin powder.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MEERU DHALWALA, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
cheese: esp. aged, feta, Muenster\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
chili\par
chili powder\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
curries\par
curry leaves\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek seeds\par
fish\par
fruits, dried\par
garam masala (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
harissa\par
honey\par
hummus (key ingredient)\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lamb, esp. grilled\par
LENTILS\par
mace\par
meats, esp. stronger-flavored, and esp. grilled\par
MEXICAN CUISINE\par
mint, dried\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mustard and mustard seeds (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
peas\par
pepper\par
pork\par
Portuguese cuisine\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
saffron\par
salads, esp. pasta, tomato\par
salmon\par
sauces (e.g., mole)\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
shellfish\par
soups (e.g., black bean)\par
Spanish cuisine\par
squash\par
stews\par
sugar, palm\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tahini\par
tamarind\par
tequila\par
Tex-Mex cuisine\par
Thai cuisine\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
turmeric\par
vegetables, esp. summer\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cumin + cayenne + coriander + garlic\par
cumin + chickpeas + yogurt\par
cumin + cinnamon + saffron\par
cumin + palm sugar + tamarind\par
cumin + tomatoes + turmeric\par
CURRY LEAVES\par
Taste: sour, bitter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderately loud\par
Tips: Add later in cooking, or to finish a dish.\par
allspice\par
Asian cuisines\par
bread, esp. Indian (e.g., naan)\par
cardamom\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curries, esp. Indian\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek seeds\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lentils\par
mustard seeds\par
paprika\par
peas\par
pepper\par
rice\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
stir-fried dishes\par
stocks\par
tamarind\par
turmeric\par
vegetables\par
CURRY POWDER AND SAUCES\par
Taste: bittersweet, pungent\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add early in cooking process.\par
beef\par
butter\par
cardamom\par
cashews\par
cayenne\par
cheese\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, red\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
dill\par
eggs and egg salad\par
fennel\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
lemon, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
mace\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms\par
nutmeg\par
oil, vegetable\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pepper: black, red\par
potatoes\par
saffron\par
salads (e.g., chicken, egg, potato)\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. fish, pea\par
star anise\par
stews, meat\par
stocks: chicken, fish\par
tamarind\par
Thai cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
turmeric\par
vegetables\par
zucchini\par
CUSTARDS\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
berries\par
caramel\par
chai\par
cherries\par
chocolate, esp. dark or white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon\par
liqueurs: nut, orange\par
mango\par
maple syrup\par
nutmeg\par
orange\par
passion fruit\par
pears\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
plums\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
strawberries\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
wine, sweet\par
DAIKON\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, marinate, raw (e.g., julienned), stew, stir-fry\par
basil\par
beef\par
beets\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
celery root\par
cheese, feta\par
chives\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cucumbers\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
duck\par
fish\par
ginger\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lovage\par
Torrijas, which means \ldblquote soaked,\rdblquote  are a [custardy] dessert in the Basque country\par
that are like French toast or pain perdu. We soak the bread until it is saturated in\par
milk, then let it sit [in the refrigerator] overnight. The next morning before\par
serving, we coat it in egg and then fry it. We serve our version of torrijas with\par
poached apples and instead of serving it with maple syrup, we serve it with\par
Pedro Ximenez [a rich, sweet, Spanish sherry] syrup that has a raisin-like quality\par
to it. The PX is just warmed and has a little glucose added to thicken it into a\par
syrup. I don\rquote t cook it or reduce it because I want to keep the alcohol in the syrup\par
so it doesn\rquote t become overly cloying.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Daikon is great in stews and is milder, sweeter, and more absorbent than turnips\par
or radishes. Duck and turnips is a classic, but I like duck with daikon even better.\par
It pairs well with other heavier flavors, such as pork or beef.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
miso\par
oil, sesame\par
onions, esp. green\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pork\par
salmon\par
scallions\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
sugar snap peas\par
tamari\par
thyme\par
tuna\par
vinegar\par
DANDELION GREENS (See Greens, Dandelion)\par
DATES\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
bacon\par
bananas\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
cakes\par
caramel\par
CHEESE, esp. Brie, Explorateur, Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta, Roquefort\par
cherries, dried\par
chicken\par
chives\par
chocolate, esp. dark or white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
couscous\par
cranberries, dried\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants\par
desserts\par
figs\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
lime\par
macadamia nuts\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nuts\par
oats\par
orange blossom water\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pistachios\par
prunes\par
quince\par
raisins\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
Dishes\par
Chocolate and Date Pudding Cake\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Baked-to-Order Date Pudding with a Caramelized Rum Sauce and a Dollop\par
of Freshly Whipped Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Toshi Sakihara, Etats-Unis (New York City)\par
Medjool Dates Stuffed with Chorizo, Wrapped in Bacon \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope,\par
T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Medjool Dates with Maple Mascarpone, Pistachios, and Orange Blossom\par
Water \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Someone told me about a savory date dish they had but could only remember\par
that it was stuffed and wrapped in bacon. This led me into the kitchen to stuff a\par
date with chorizo, wrap it in bacon, and then add charmoula [typically made of\par
paprika, cayenne pepper, cumin, garlic, lemon juice, parsley, cilantro, and olive\par
oil]. The dish just hits the mark. I also serve a sweet date dish that I stole from\par
Judy Rodgers of Zuni Caf\'e9. My version is made with Medjool dates that have\par
maple mascarpone smeared in, pistachios crumbled on top, and orange blossom\par
water. The orange blossom water gives people a visceral reaction because you\par
don\rquote t see it, but you taste it. When people have the dish, they lick their fingers\par
trying to figure it out!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
Emily Luchetti of Farallon in San Francisco on When and How to\par
Serve Dessert\par
The older I get, the more I like my dessert at 3:00 in the afternoon. I like it all by\par
itself, it has no competition and you are usually hungry. Your taste buds are wide\par
awake and you can appreciate what it is. Of course if we have people over for\par
dinner I can\rquote t get away with not serving dessert!\par
When you serve a dessert after a meal you are already full, not in a bad way,\par
but if you had a first course and main course your palate has gone through many\par
flavor components. At home I always take a little break and give people a\par
breather between dinner and dessert. I\rquote ll have my guests help with the dishes or,\par
if it\rquote s a formal party, I\rquote ll let them talk for a half hour and finish off the red wine.\par
It is not just for their stomachs but for the palate as well.\par
I hate when it comes to slicing a dessert and someone says, \ldblquote No, no, that is\par
too big!\rdblquote  I used to fight it and take it personally, so now I just ask in advance.\par
The guest appreciates it, has a small piece, and then has seconds. It is\par
recognizing that everyone has their own choice regarding how much they want\par
to eat. If I am serving a shortcake, I will put the fruit with a little cream on the\par
cake, then pass a bowl of whipped cream, so whether they want to pile it or keep\par
it light, they can.\par
sugar: brown, white\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
dates + caramel + vanilla + walnuts\par
dates + chocolate + walnuts\par
dates + cream + rum\par
dates + maple syrup + mascarpone + pistachios\par
dates + orange + walnuts\par
DESSERTS\par
Tips: Sweetness satiates the appetite, so generally end a meal on a sweet\par
note.\par
Even sweet desserts should be in balance (their acidity, saltiness, etc.).\par
Dessert wine should always be sweeter than the dessert it accompanies.\par
DILL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light, soft-leaved\par
Volume: moderately loud\par
Tips: Always use dill fresh, not cooked.\par
asparagus\par
avocados\par
basil\par
beans, esp. fava or green\par
beef\par
beets\par
breads, esp. rye\par
broccoli\par
cabbage\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
celery root\par
cheese: cheddar, cottage, goat, soft\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
corn\par
crayfish\par
cream cheese\par
cream sauces\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
CUCUMBERS\par
eggplant\par
EGGS AND EGG DISHES (e.g., omelets)\par
European cuisines\par
FISH, esp. whole\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
Greek cuisine\par
green beans\par
halibut\par
horseradish\par
lemon balm\par
lemon thyme\par
lovage\par
meats, e.g., lamb\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
North American cuisine\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
PICKLES (key ingredient)\par
POTATOES AND POTATO SALAD\par
poultry\par
rice, esp. pilaf\par
Russian cuisine\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salmon, cured (key ingredient)\par
salmon, smoked\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
shellfish\par
Dill adds a certain freshness and cleanness to a dish. During the winter, most of\par
my fish dishes have dill \f2\emdash\f1  as well as dishes like goulash with noodles, which is\par
served with both chives and dill for their herbal freshness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Duck, Butternut Squash, and Banana with Thai Flavors \f2\emdash\f1  Grant Achatz,\par
Alinea (Chicago)\par
Liberty Farms Duck Breast with Smoked Bacon, Savoy Spinach, and\par
Pickled Mulberries, Ginger Consomm\'e9 \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San\par
Francisco)\par
Roast Duck Breast, Bok Choy, and Cassava Chips with Sesame Soy\par
Dressing and Pickled Chiles \f2\emdash\f1  Brad Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Duck with Tomato, Red Chile, and Dried Mixed Fruits \f2\emdash\f1  Zarela Martinez,\par
Zarela (New York City)\par
Blossom Honey \ldblquote Lacquered\rdblquote  Aged Moulard Duck Breast, Caramelized\par
Quince and Fennel, Broccoli Rabe, Sicilian Pistachios, and Port \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie\par
Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Grilled Duck Breast with Creamy Farro, Spring Onion, and Sour Cherry\par
Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Peter Nowakoski, Rat\rquote s (Hamilton, New Jersey)\par
Braised Duck Legs on Wilted Watercress in an Aromatic Asian Broth \f2\emdash\f1\par
Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) Cured\par
Duck Meat with a Salad of Licorice-Scented Fennel Shavings and Blood\par
Orange \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Drake Duck \ldblquote Sirloin\rdblquote  with Roasted Sweet Potatoes and Port Wine Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Duck Breast with Fava Beans and Roasted Plums \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham\par
Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Grilled Duck Breast over Aromatic Tamarillo Sauce, Creamy Quinoa, and\par
Sweet Potato Puree \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Moulard Duck Breast with Parsnips, Wild Mushrooms, and a Rosemary\par
Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Muscovy Duck Breast with Rainier Cherries, Pecans, and Garden Lettuces\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni Caf\'e9 (San Francisco)\par
Charcoaled Duck with Walnuts, Confit Leg, and Apricots Baked in Brown\par
Sugar Brioche \f2\emdash\f1  Lydia Shire, Locke-Ober (Boston)\par
Grilled Liberty Farm Duck with Duck-Liver Wontons in Wild Mushroom\par
Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Hiro Sone, Terra (St. Helena, California)\par
Grilled Duck Breast in Lime Leaf Curry with Ginger, Jalape\'f1o Basmati\par
Rice \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
Spit-Roasted Duck with Quince Sauce\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Alice Waters, Chez Panisse (Berkeley, California)\par
Our paella made with duck confit, foie gras, and morels is in honor of [the late\par
chef] Jean-Louis Palladin. We made a paella with the fat from the duck and\par
morels, and to finish it we topped it with thin slices of raw foie gras. The foie\par
gras would get warm from the hot rice and melt into the rice. It is an amazing\par
paella!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Duck is great with fruit. We serve a duck with Seville oranges that are a little\par
bitter. We made a puree of the pulp and a little peel that had nice acidity and\par
bitterness. We then added fennel that had been cooked with butter and a little star\par
anise.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
For my dish of lacquered duck and peppercress, I make a duck cooked with\par
honey served with a brown butter\f2\endash\f1 honey that gives the duck a sweet, nutty\par
flavor. To cut the sweetness, I added a reduction of pomegranate juice and oil\par
emulsion to give the dish a tart contrast.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
shrimp\par
sole\par
soups, esp. potato\par
sour cream and sour cream sauces\par
spinach\par
squash\par
TOMATOES AND TOMATO JUICES\par
trout\par
Turkish cuisine\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
YOGURT AND YOGURT SAUCES\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
dill + cilantro + mint\par
dill + cucumber + salmon\par
DUCK\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise (esp. legs), grill (esp. breast), roast, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
APPLES, esp. Granny Smith\par
apricots (sauce)\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, fava\par
blueberries\par
bok choy\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage: green, red\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery root\par
cheese: Asiago, Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta\par
CHERRIES: regular, sun-dried\par
chervil\par
chestnuts\par
chicory\par
chile peppers: ancho, jalape\'f1o\par
chili paste\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
chocolate / cocoa\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus fruit\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
currants, black or red: fruit, preserves\par
curry paste, esp. Thai green, or curry powder, esp. Madras\par
dates\par
duck fat\par
farro\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
five-spice powder\par
foie gras\par
GARLIC\par
GINGER\par
hoisin sauce\par
honey, esp. lavender\par
horseradish\par
huckleberries\par
juniper berries\par
kaffir lime leaves\par
kumquats\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
LEMON, JUICE, preserved\par
lemongrass\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
liqueur, orange (e.g., Grand Marnier), peach\par
mangoes\par
marjoram\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
morels\par
MUSHROOMS, ESP. WILD (esp. porcini or shiitake)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
nuts, macadamia\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. green\par
ONIONS, esp. green, sweet\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peaches\par
pears\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, green, pink, white\par
plums: fruit, sauce\par
pomegranates\par
poppy seeds\par
port\par
potatoes\par
prunes\par
raspberries\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice, esp. basmati, wild\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
sake\par
SALT:fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
sauerkraut\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds: black, white\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
SOY SAUCE\par
spinach\par
squash, butternut\par
star anise\par
STOCKS: chicken, duck, game, meat, turkey\par
stuffing\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind\par
tarragon, fresh\par
teriyaki sauce\par
Thai cuisine\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes: paste, puree, raw\par
turmeric\par
TURNIPS\par
vegetables, root\par
verjus\par
vermouth\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, raspberry, red wine, rice wine, sherry,\par
white\par
water chestnuts\par
watercress\par
WINE, dry red (e.g., Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot), dry white (e.g.,\par
Riesling), port, rice, sweet (Madeira, Muscat)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
duck + almonds + apricots\par
duck + almonds + honey\par
duck + apples + celery root + hazelnuts\par
duck + apples + parsnips (and/or other root vegetables)\par
duck + apricots + cherries + basmati rice\par
duck + arugula + lentils\par
duck + arugula + vinaigrette + walnuts\par
duck + bacon + ginger + spinach\par
duck + blackberries + ginger + Pinot Noir\par
duck + cabbage + mushrooms\par
duck + cherries + vinegar\par
duck + cinnamon + honey + orange + star anise\par
duck + cloves + garlic + orange + prunes + red wine\par
duck + dates + turnips\par
duck + fava beans + pecorino cheese\par
duck + garlic + ginger + mint\par
duck + ginger + honey + soy sauce\par
duck + ginger + kumquats + black pepper + star anise\par
duck + green peppercorns + sweet potatoes\par
duck + honey + lavender\par
duck + lemon + plums\par
duck + lentils + onions + balsamic vinegar\par
duck + orange + scallions\par
duck + parsnips + turnips\par
We serve a sixteen-ounce duck breast with a Pinot Noir, blackberry, and ginger\par
sauce. The sauce is made from frozen Oregon blackberries, which I am not shy\par
to admit I use, because eleven months out of the year, there is nothing better. At\par
home, I make a version of this sauce with currant preserves: I saut\'e9 the duck,\par
then add lots of fresh ginger and shallots, a few tablespoons of currant preserves,\par
and some champagne vinegar to cut the sweetness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LOMONACO, CHEF, PORTER HOUSE NEW YORK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Duck Confit: Wild Mushrooms, Red Swiss Chard, Sweet and Sour Duck Jus\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Olivier Muller, DB Bistro Moderne (New York City)\par
Grilled Eggplant Terrine with Red Bell Pepper and Italian Parsley Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
David Bouley, Bouley (New York City)\par
Eggplant Ravioli with Medallions of Maine Lobster and Tomato-Basil\par
Butter \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington,\par
Virginia) Baba Ghanoush Soup, Made with Eggplant, Tahini, Tomato Water,\par
Garlic, and Cumin \f2\emdash\f1  Michel Richard, Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
Eggplant, Peas, and Paneer in Pomegranate-Cinnamon Masala with Raita\par
and Chapati \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
DUCK CONFIT\par
beets\par
cheese, Roquefort\par
fris\'e9e\par
garlic\par
lentils, green\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: hazelnut, walnut\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, white\par
salt\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
vinegar, red wine\par
watercress\par
EASTERN EUROPEAN CUISINES\par
allspice, esp. in desserts\par
bacon\par
beef\par
beets\par
bell peppers, green\par
cabbage\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery root\par
chicken\par
cinnamon, esp. in desserts\par
cloves, esp. in desserts\par
cream\par
dill\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger, esp. in desserts\par
juniper berries\par
lamb\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
noodles\par
offal\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
sour cream\par
sugar\par
tomatoes\par
veal\par
vegetables, root\par
vinegar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beef + cabbage + rice\par
beets + dill + sour cream\par
cabbage + caraway + vinegar\par
chicken + cream + paprika\par
noodles + caraway seeds + sour cream\par
EGGPLANT\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, roast, saut\'e9, steam, stirfry, stuff\par
allspice\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
basil\par
bell peppers, esp. green, red\par
bouquet garni\par
bread, pita\par
bread crumbs\par
cabbage, green\par
capers\par
cashews\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: Emmental, feta, goat, Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, Parmesan, ricotta,\par
ricotta salata, Romano, Swiss\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers, esp. fresh green\par
chili powder\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dips\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
garam masala\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lamb\par
LEMON, juice\par
lentils\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
miso\par
mushrooms, esp. button, shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives: black, green\par
ONIONS, esp. red, Spanish, yellow\par
oregano\par
paprika (garnish)\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
peppers, piquillo (e.g., Spanish cuisine)\par
pine nuts\par
pomegranate\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sausage\par
savory\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
squash, yellow or other summer\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tahini\par
tamari\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES, tomato juice, tomato sauce\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, red wine, rice wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
eggplant + basil + bell peppers + garlic + tomatoes\par
eggplant + basil + mozzarella cheese\par
eggplant + basil + olive oil + balsamic vinegar\par
eggplant + basil + ricotta salata cheese + tomatoes\par
eggplant + bell peppers + garlic + mustard\par
eggplant + garlic + lemon juice + olive oil + parsley + tahini\par
eggplant + garlic + onions + parsley\par
eggplant + lentils + yogurt\par
Eggplant is funny. It is a subtle vegetable that can work with strong herbs like\par
rosemary or marjoram.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Eggplant can take on an even richer, meatier flavor when it\rquote s enhanced with\par
miso or tahini.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
My eggplant gazpacho really tastes like a baba ghanoush soup. We start the\par
soup by roasting eggplant and onions. Then we blend this together with tahini,\par
tomato water, buttermilk for acidity, lemon, and garlic. The soup is garnished\par
with three gels made of eggplant, lemon, and onion \f2\emdash\f1  all flavors from the soup.\par
I love texture \f2\emdash\f1  people joke with me and call me \ldblquote Captain Crunch\rdblquote  \f2\emdash\f1  so at the\par
last second, we top the soup with Rice Krispies.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Frittata with Zucchini and Parmesan Cheese, with Arugula Salad \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Poached Eggs with Crispy Polenta and Tomato Hollandaise \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew\par
Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Warm Salad of Greens with Pancetta and Scrambled Eggs \f2\emdash\f1  Cesare\par
Casella, Maremma (New York City)\par
Organic Egg Frittata with Mushrooms, Zucchini, and Gruy\'e8re \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Organic Farm Egg Omelet with Capriole Farms Goat Cheese, Oranges, and\par
Citrus Hollandaise, Toasted Ciabatta, and Apple Butter \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie\par
Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Organic Farm Egg and Wood-Grilled Spanish Sausage with a Salad of\par
Italian Fris\'e9e, Smoked Red Thumb Potatoes, French Breakfast Radishes,\par
Sweet Garlic, and Herbs \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Organic Scrambled Egg with a Lime Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche and White Sturgeon\par
Caviar \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Traditional Eggs Benedict, Shaved Canadian Bacon, Lemon-Thyme\par
Hollandaise, and Truffle Pesto \f2\emdash\f1  Nori Sugie, Asiate (New York City)\par
Smoked Chicken, Roasted Bell Pepper, Artichoke, and Fontina Cheese\par
Omelet \f2\emdash\f1  Nori Sugie, Asiate (New York City)\par
I like frittata as a main course at lunch or dinner. You can simply have frittata\par
with a soup, and it\rquote s a meal. Frittata is like a risotto in its versatility; you can go\par
crazy with it and add almost anything to them. I love my frittata with vegetables;\par
asparagus, artichokes, mushrooms, onions, zucchini all work. With any variety\par
of vegetables I would add some fresh herbs and cheese. Since the eggs are the\par
protein, the only thing I don\rquote t personally care for in my frittata is meat, or maybe\par
pickled vegetables.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
We will serve the combination of poached egg and spring asparagus differently\par
at brunch versus dinner. At brunch, we will serve sliced asparagus mixed with\par
other sliced vegetables in the bottom of a cazuela [clay pot] with the poached\par
egg on top. For dinner, it will be green market asparagus topped with a poached\par
egg and anchovy butter.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
EGGS AND EGG-BASED DISHES \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake (frittata, quiche, etc.), boil (soft or hard), fry, poach,\par
scramble\par
asparagus\par
bacon and pancetta\par
basil\par
bell peppers, esp. green\par
bread\par
butter\par
capers\par
caviar\par
cheeses: Comt\'e9, Emmental, feta, Gruy\'e8re, Havarti, mozzarella,\par
Parmesan, Roquefort\par
chervil\par
chives\par
chorizo\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
garlic\par
ginkgo nuts\par
ham: Serrano, Virginia\par
herbs, esp. fines herbes (i.e., chervil, chives, parsley, tarragon)\par
leeks\par
marjoram\par
mushrooms\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sausage\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sorrel\par
spinach\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles\par
AVOID\par
cranberries\par
Flavor Affinities\par
eggs + bacon + cheese + onions\par
eggs + bacon + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + onions (Alsatian)\par
eggs + beets + smoked whitefish (Yiddish)\par
eggs + cheese + mushrooms + thyme\par
eggs + kale + pinkelwurst (oatmeal sausage) (Berliner)\par
eggs + mozzarella cheese + tomatoes (Roman)\par
eggs + mushrooms + red wine (Bordelaise)\par
eggs + potato + sausage\par
EGGS, FRITTATA\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bacon and pancetta\par
basil\par
bell peppers\par
cheese: feta, Gruy\'e8re, Havarti, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chives\par
herbs\par
Italian cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
olives\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
salt, esp. kosher\par
sausage\par
shallots\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
zucchini\par
EGGS, HARD-BOILED\par
Techniques: chop, devil, halve, sieve, slice\par
almonds\par
basil\par
butter, unsalted\par
cayenne\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
curry\par
dill\par
garlic\par
ginger, pickled\par
leeks\par
mayonnaise\par
mint\par
mustard: Dijon, dry\par
olive oil\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
salmon\par
salt, kosher\par
sauce, b\'e9chamel\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
ENDIVE\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, glaze, grill, raw, roast\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
arugula\par
avocado\par
Dishes\par
Cabbageless Sauerkraut: Pickled Onions, Fennel, Endive, and Green Apple\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Christopher Lee, Gilt (New York City)\par
Endive Tips with Red Pepper Puree, Maple Molasses, and Candied Walnuts\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Endive and Grapefruit Salad with Honey Dressing and Toasted Pecans \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Belgian Endive Salad, Shredded Carrot and Apple Salad, Concord Grapes,\par
Sonoma Verjus Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Nori Sugie, Asiate (New York City)\par
People shy away from endive because of its bitterness. But a good chef will pair\par
it with a sweet dressing.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, NAHA (CHICAGO)\par
bacon and pancetta\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom, green\par
celery\par
CHEESE: Asiago, blue, goat, Gorgonzola, Gruy\'e8re, herb, Parmesan,\par
Roquefort\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek\par
French cuisine\par
fris\'e9e\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms\par
mustard: Dijon, dry, whole grain\par
mustard seeds\par
OIL: grapeseed, peanut, safflower, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, black\par
orange: fruit, juice\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
nuts\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
salads\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
seafood\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
smoked fish, esp. salmon or trout\par
sour cream\par
stocks: chicken, fish, veal\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette, mustard\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, raspberry, red wine, sherry\par
WALNUTS\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
endive + argula + radicchio\par
endive + cheese + mushrooms\par
ENDIVE, CURLY (See Fris\'e9e)\par
ENGLISH CUISINE\par
cheese: Cheddar, Stilton\par
cream\par
fish (and chips)\par
game\par
jams and preserves\par
lamb\par
mutton\par
oats\par
peas\par
puddings (e.g., Yorkshire)\par
roast beef\par
scones\par
tea\par
tea sandwiches\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
EPAZOTE\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
beans, esp. black\par
bell peppers\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
Central American cuisine\par
chile peppers\par
chorizo\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
corn\par
cumin\par
fish\par
I have always loved to mix meat and fish in a very delicate way. I went to Cut\par
[Wolfgang Puck\rquote s steak restaurant] and had my first true Kobe beef steak. I\par
begged Lee [Hefter, the chef] for his source! Surf and turf is not as much about\par
having a piece of meat and fish on the plate as about the ideas they create for\par
flavor combinations. The Kobe beef triggered everything. I can\rquote t serve steak at a\par
fish restaurant, but the Kobe was so good I had to find a way to justify it on the\par
menu. I came up with Kobe beef and escalar, with a brown butter that is classic\par
with the fish. The final dish was inspired by having Korean barbecue at a\par
friend\rquote s house, which is when I realized how to bring it together.\par
I wanted another element in the dish because the Kobe, escalar, and brown\par
butter are all rich and all soft. The dish also has squash, Japanese pears, and napa\par
cabbage marinated like Korean kimchee for just a moment. These elements add\par
contrast, chewiness, and crunchiness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
garlic\par
goat\par
Latin American cuisines\par
legumes\par
lime\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mole sauces\par
mushrooms\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
pepper\par
pork\par
rice\par
salsas\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
squash\par
tomatillos\par
vegetables, green\par
ESCALAR\par
brown butter\par
Kobe beef\par
Flavor Affinities\par
escalar + Kobe beef + brown butter\par
ESCAROLE\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, grill, roast\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
beans\par
beef\par
butter\par
cheese: Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, Parmesan, Roquefort\par
chile peppers, dried red\par
cream\par
cumin\par
fish\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
onions\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
poultry\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt, kosher\par
shallots\par
soups, esp. bean\par
stock, chicken\par
tomatoes (e.g., cherry)\par
vinegar, red or white wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
escarole + apples + Cheddar cheese\par
escarole + olive oil + shallots\par
ETHIOPIAN CUISINE\par
beef, raw or stewed\par
injera\par
spices\par
stewed dishes\par
vegetables, stewed\par
wine, honey\par
EUROPEAN, EASTERN CUISINES (See Eastern European\par
Cuisines)\par
FALL (See Autumn)\par
FENNEL\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: boil, braise, fry, grill, raw, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets: vegetable, juice\par
bell peppers\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
carrots\par
Escarole is a bitter but sturdy leaf, and in a salad dressed with olive oil and red\par
wine vinegar, I like to add Cheddar for its sharpness and creaminess plus some\par
crisp and refreshing apples.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Wild Fennel and Ramp Soup with Broken Capellini and Alaskan King Crab\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Lidia Bastianich, Felidia (New York City)\par
Braised Fennel Salad with Pears and Gorgonzola \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo\par
(New York City)\par
Puree of Fennel Soup with Apples, Almonds, and Madras Curry \f2\emdash\f1  Traci\par
Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
CHEESE: blue, goat, Gorgonzola, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, pecorino\par
chicken\par
chives\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
endive\par
fennel pollen\par
fennel seeds\par
FISH, esp. grilled and/or whole salmon, sea bass, snapper\par
fris\'e9e\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
Italian cuisine\par
herbs\par
honey\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon balm\par
lettuce: Bibb, butter\par
lime: juice, leaf (kaffir)\par
lobster\par
lovage\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mussels\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, green\par
I like fennel shaved raw, with just some lemon juice, olive oil, and fennel seeds.\par
Fennel goes well with dried meats like prosciutto. It also pairs nicely with\par
shellfish like langoustines, lobster, or crab. Fennel can work with fish as well as\par
with meat. It goes really well with cold poached salmon or white, light meats\par
like chicken or veal.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Fennel is a flavor I like so much that I have to show restraint with it. You can\par
add anything to it because other flavors really adhere to it. You can braise it in\par
olive oil and veal stock to get one flavor. Or you can braise it in olive oil, white\par
wine, and water and get a whole other flavor. Or you can quarter it, caramelize\par
it, and roast it in the oven \f2\emdash\f1  now you have a sugar flavor and it can become a\par
dessert. I love fennel every way including braised, caramelized, dried, candied,\par
and pureed. In the fall, I served raw shaved fennel with arugula, and shaved\par
Honeycrisp apple with a dressing made of apple cider, honey, and mustard.\par
Fennel puts the salad over the top with its crunch. In summer, we serve a fennel\par
and fig tarte tatin with duck. You get a Fig Newton flavor from the fig and\par
Pernod flavor from the fennel; they match really well.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  CARRIE NAHABEDIAN, NAHA (CHICAGO)\par
onions, esp. red\par
ORANGE: JUICE, segments\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pecans\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
Pernod\par
pickles\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salads (e.g., green or tuna) and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sambuca\par
sauces\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups, esp. vegetable\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
stews, esp. fish\par
stocks: chicken, veal, vegetable\par
stuffing\par
sugar (pinch)\par
swordfish\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
tuna\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. summer\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: champagne, cider, raspberry\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine: dry white, vermouth\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fennel + almond + fennel seeds + honey + lemon\par
fennel + apple + pecorino cheese + watercress\par
fennel + asparagus + fennel seeds + garlic + olive oil\par
fennel + garlic + onions + tomatoes\par
fennel + lemon + mint + olive oil + olives + orange\par
fennel + lemon + olive oil + Parmesan cheese + parsley\par
fennel + onions + potatoes + chicken stock\par
fennel + orange + sambuca\par
FENNEL POLLEN\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Tips: Use to finish a dish.\par
apricots\par
beef\par
boar\par
chicken\par
cream\par
fennel seeds\par
fish, esp. flakier white, poached or steamed\par
garlic\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
nuts, esp. almonds, pistachios\par
pasta\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
rice or risotto\par
salads\par
salmon\par
sea trout\par
shellfish\par
vegetables\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fennel pollen + lemon + yogurt\par
Fennel pollen has a light, fennel-anise flavor with a floral component. It is\par
delicate, so you don\rquote t cook with it \f2\emdash\f1  you just finish a dish with it. It is great on\par
lighter things like salads, poached or steamed flaky white fish, poultry, or pork.\par
When a dish has fennel pollen, even before the food hits your mouth you will\par
notice a floral smell that gets you thinking of summer, lighter foods, and\par
freshness. I use it with my sea trout dish, which is served with a simple salad of\par
green apple, fennel, jicama, pistachios, and dried gooseberries. The dish is\par
topped with the pollen blended with some yogurt, lemon juice, and preserved\par
lemon, which we drape over the fish. This dish just screams \ldblquote summer.\rdblquote  With a\par
glass of Sauvignon Blanc on the terrace in the early evening, you\rquote re set!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I really like fennel pollen. The majority of the time, we use it in a marinade for\par
meats like pork, boar, chicken, and lamb. It adds an interesting herbaceous,\par
aromatic note and a mysterious flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
FENNEL SEEDS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Tips: Add near end of cooking process.\par
apples\par
baked goods (e.g., breads)\par
basil\par
beans\par
beets\par
bouillabaisse\par
cabbage\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
curries\par
duck\par
fennel\par
figs\par
FISH, ESP. STEAMED\par
five-spice powder (key ingredient)\par
garam masala (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
herbes de Provence (key ingredient)\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
lentils\par
meats, braised\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
olives\par
orange\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
pickles\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
ras el hanout (key ingredient)\par
rice\par
saffron\par
salads\par
sauces\par
sauerkraut\par
*SAUSAGES, esp. Italian\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. fish\par
star anise\par
stews, esp. fish\par
stocks and broths\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
vegetables, esp. green\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fennel seeds + cinnamon + cloves + peppercorns + star anise (five-spice\par
powder)\par
FENUGREEK\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
cardamom\par
cauliflower\par
cheeses, esp. creamy\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cream, esp. sour\par
cumin\par
CURRIES AND CURRY POWDERS\par
Ethiopian cuisine\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
garlic\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
I love fenugreek, and its incredible aromatics. It goes well with everything from\par
lamb to chicken to vegetables.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VIKRAM VIJ, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
legumes\par
lentils\par
maple syrup, artificial (key ingredient)\par
mayonnaise\par
mint\par
peas\par
pepper\par
potatoes\par
rabbit\par
rice\par
sauces, esp. creamy\par
shellfish, shrimp\par
soups\par
spinach\par
stews, esp. tomato-based\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vegetables, esp. green and root\par
yogurt\par
FETA CHEESE (See Cheese, Feta)\par
FIDDLEHEAD FERNS\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques/Tips: Always serve cooked: blanch, boil, saut\'e9, steam.\par
American cuisine, esp. New England\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beans, fava\par
beef\par
brown butter\par
butter, sweet\par
cayenne\par
cheese: Comt\'e9, goat, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
fennel\par
fish (e.g., halibut, salmon)\par
garlic\par
hollandaise sauce\par
horseradish\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
MUSHROOMS, WILD, e.g., chanterelles, morels\par
mustard\par
oil: sesame, walnut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. cipollini, red, spring\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta, esp. gnocchi\par
pepper\par
polenta\par
potatoes, esp. Yukon gold\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
ramps\par
salads\par
salt\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
veal\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fiddlehead ferns + butter + herbs + morel mushrooms + ramps\par
fiddlehead ferns + garlic + morel mushrooms + salmon\par
fiddlehead ferns + sesame oil and/or seeds + soy sauce\par
Dishes\par
Bresaola with Fiddleheads and Pecorino\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
FIGS, DRIED\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: stew\par
almonds\par
anise seeds\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
bananas\par
bay leaf\par
brandy\par
caramel\par
cheese: goat, manchego, Parmesan, ricotta\par
cherries, dried\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate, esp. dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
cream\par
dates\par
game\par
ginger\par
HONEY\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
macadamia nuts\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
ORANGE: fruit, juice\par
pastries\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pineapple\par
pistachios\par
prunes\par
quince\par
raisins, yellow\par
sugar, brown\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
WALNUTS\par
WINE, RED, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
dried figs + anise + oranges + walnuts\par
FIGS, FRESH\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, caramelize, deep-fry, grill, raw, roast\par
ALMONDS\par
anchovies\par
anise, esp. green\par
apples\par
arugula\par
Dishes\par
Fresh Fig Tart with a Dollop of Mascarpone \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef,\par
Babbo (New York City)\par
Fig and Ricotta Gelato\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Honey-Baked Figs Stuffed with Walnuts\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Black Mission Figs with Goat Cheese Mousse, Honey Ice Cream, and Port\par
Sabayon \f2\emdash\f1  Gary Danko, Gary Danko (San Francisco)\par
Rogue River Oregonzola, Black Mission Figs, Lavender Honey, Toasted\par
Hazelnuts \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
bacon\par
butter, unsalted\par
caramel\par
CHEESE: blue, fromage blanc, goat, Gorgonzola, dry Jack, manchego,\par
provolone, ricotta, Roquefort\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee / espresso\par
cognac\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
duck\par
fish (e.g., bass)\par
five-spice powder\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapes\par
ham, esp. Serrano\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
Kirsch\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
liqueurs, esp. raspberry\par
mango\par
mascarpone\par
meats, cured and smoked\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
oil, grapeseed\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
pancetta\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
pork\par
port\par
prosciutto\par
quail\par
radicchio\par
RASPBERRIES\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. dark\par
sorbets\par
star anise\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
thyme\par
VANILLA\par
Vin Santo\par
VINEGAR: BALSAMIC, red wine, sherry\par
WALNUTS\par
wine: dry red, Marsala, port\par
Flavor Affinities\par
figs + almonds + green anise\par
figs + black pepper + ricotta cheese\par
figs + caramel + vanilla + balsamic vinegar\par
figs + cilantro + lime\par
figs + cinnamon + honey + orange\par
figs + cream + goat cheese + honey\par
figs + cream + honey + raspberries\par
figs + goat cheese + pine nuts\par
figs + honey + mascarpone\par
figs + lemon + rosemary\par
figs + olive oil + rosemary\par
figs + Pernod + walnuts\par
FILET MIGNON (See Beef \f2\emdash\f1  Steak: Filet Mignon)\par
FINES HERBES\par
Tips: Use late in the cooking process.\par
French cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chervil + chives + parsley + tarragon\par
FISH \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See individual fish; Seafood)\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
anise\par
basil\par
broths\par
butter\par
cream\par
dill\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (i.e., chervil, chives, parsley, tarragon)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lime: juice, zest\par
parsley\par
peas (accompaniment)\par
Think of white fish \f2\emdash\f1  dorade, Dover sole, pompano, skate, snapper \f2\emdash\f1  as white\par
meat, and red fish \f2\emdash\f1  salmon, tuna \f2\emdash\f1  as red meat. Salmon is like pork, and tuna\par
like beef, and both combine better with stronger flavors. Tuna even pairs with\par
some of the same flavors as beef, including black pepper, red wine, and wasabi.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I like my fish simply grilled or steamed. I choose fish that have a lot of flavor so\par
very little has to be done to them. I don\rquote t believe you need 10,000 things for a\par
great piece of fish. Dover sole doesn\rquote t need anything. Turbot has a wonderful\par
flavor with no help. We get our baby octopus from Sicily and they have plenty of\par
flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Onion-Crusted White Fish with Tomato-Water Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Michel Richard,\par
Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
peppercorns\par
rhubarb\par
salt\par
tomatoes\par
wine, esp. white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fish + ginger + lemongrass\par
fish + herbs + white wine\par
fish + onions + tomatoes\par
FISH SAUCE\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
lime, juice\par
sauces, dipping\par
shrimp\par
Southeast Asian cuisines\par
spring rolls\par
sugar\par
Thai cuisine\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vegetables\par
FIVE-SPICE POWDER\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
beef\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
duck\par
pork\par
stews\par
stir-fries\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cinnamon + cloves + fennel seeds + star anise + Szechuan peppercorns\par
FLOUNDER\par
Season: summer\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, fry, poach, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
basil\par
bread crumbs or cracker crumbs\par
butter\par
capers\par
chili sauce\par
chives\par
coconut milk\par
corn\par
cornmeal (e.g., as a crust)\par
crab\par
curry, green\par
dill\par
lemon\par
lime\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
miso\par
noodles\par
olive oil\par
onions, Vidalia\par
pasta\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
ramps\par
salt\par
seaweed, esp. konbu\par
shiso\par
ume (Japanese plum)\par
wine, white\par
yuzu\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
flounder + capers + lemon\par
flounder + shiso + ume\par
flounder + konbu seaweed + shiso\par
FOIE GRAS\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: braise, saut\'e9, terrine\par
allspice\par
APPLES\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
bacon\par
brandy\par
cabbage\par
cherries\par
chives\par
chocolate\par
cognac\par
endive\par
figs: dried, fresh\par
French cuisine\par
ginger\par
grapes\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
mangoes\par
miso\par
Dishes\par
Flounder Wrapped in Spring Roll Paper Served with House-Made Egg\par
Noodles, Thai Green Curry\f2\endash\f1 Coconut Milk Broth with Snow Peas, Yuzu\par
Lime, and Honey Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Colvin Run (Vienna, Virginia)\par
Sesame-Flavored Flounder and Wakame Seaweed Soup \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz\par
Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Foie Gras with Roasted Plums\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Foie Gras Sushi with Plum-Wine Jelly\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Seared Hudson Valley Foie Gras with Caramelized Three-Pear Salad \f2\emdash\f1\par
Jimmy Schmidt, at the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception I found a recipe\par
for olive oil cake at the same time that I was perfecting making a foie gras\par
mousse that was pliable to the point that it could be made into an icing. So, I\par
created a savory cake topped with the icing. Then one day while I was online I\par
heard someone mention Twinkies, and the next thing I knew I was ordering real\par
Twinkie pans online. Three days later, Twinkies stuffed with foie gras was born.\par
I serve it with fresh strawberries and black pepper. It seems like everything has\par
been done already, but I like to think I am the only person working with\par
Twinkies.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
nutmeg\par
oil, grapeseed\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
port\par
raisins\par
rhubarb\par
salt, kosher\par
Sauternes\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
strawberries\par
sugar (dash)\par
tomatoes\par
truffles and truffle oil, esp. white\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider\par
Flavor Affinities\par
foie gras + cherries + balsamic vinegar\par
foie gras + cherries + pistachios\par
foie gras + strawberries + black pepper\par
FRENCH CUISINE \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
beef\par
cheese\par
CREAM\par
eggs\par
herbs\par
mustards\par
onions\par
parsley\par
pastries\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
roasted meats\par
SAUCES\par
sausages\par
saut\'e9ed dishes\par
seafood\par
shallots\par
spirits\par
STOCK\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
truffles, black\par
veal\par
vinegars\par
wheat, esp. as flour\par
WINE\par
Flavor Affinities\par
butter + cheese + stock\par
butter + cheese + wine\par
butter + herbs\par
cream + herbs\par
herbs + stock\par
herbs + wine\par
FRENCH CUISINE, NORTHERN\par
apples: cider, fruit, juice\par
buckwheat (key ingredient in crepes)\par
BUTTER\par
cabbage\par
Calvados\par
charcuterie\par
cheese: Camembert\par
CREAM\par
Tarte flamb\'e9eis a dish that is 200 years old and was originally made by farmers\par
in Alsace in the village\rquote s wood-burning oven used for baking bread. The tarte\par
flamb\'e9e developed from what was on hand on the farm: cheese and cream from\par
the cow, pork from the pig, and onions from the field, which they added to some\par
dough. Since we don\rquote t have a wood-burning oven [in the middle of Manhattan],\par
we have to tweak the recipe from the classic. We have to tweak the cream\par
because if we don\rquote t, it breaks and just becomes grease. Instead, I use a mix of\par
fromage blanc, cream, and sour cream so I can get the same result as cream in\par
the original. And to compensate for not having a fire, I use an applewoodsmoked bacon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
fish, freshwater\par
game\par
lobster\par
oysters\par
pork: bacon, ham\par
sausages\par
shellfish\par
veal\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bacon + cheese + cream\par
FRENCH CUISINE, SOUTHERN (aka Proven\'e7al Cuisine)\par
anchovies\par
anise\par
basil\par
beef, esp. stewed\par
bell peppers\par
chicken, esp. grilled\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
garlic\par
grilled dishes\par
herbes de Provence\par
lamb, esp. roasted\par
lavender\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
mustard\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pork\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
basil + garlic + olive oil + Parmesan cheese\par
basil + olive oil + tomatoes\par
bell peppers + eggplant + garlic + onions + tomatoes + zucchini\par
chicken + garlic + olives + onions + tomatoes\par
garlic + egg yolk + lemon + olive oil + saffron\par
marjoram + rosemary + sage + thyme (aka herbes de Provence)\par
olives + basil + capers + garlic + olive oil (aka tapenade)\par
pork + anise + marjoram + thyme\par
seafood + garlic + olive oil + tomatoes\par
FRESHNESS\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Tips: Listed herbs are always used fresh (with little or no cooking), and add\par
a note of freshness to a dish. Other listed flavors add a bright note to a dish.\par
For the opposite, see listing for Slow-Cooked.\par
basil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
citrus\par
dill\par
fennel pollen\par
mint\par
tarragon\par
FRIS\'c9E (a fine-leaved variety of curly endive)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: raw, wilt\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
avocado\par
bacon / lardons\par
basil\par
bell peppers: red, yellow\par
beets\par
CHEESE: BLUE, GOAT, PARMESAN, ROQUEFORT\par
cherries, dried\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
croutons (accent)\par
cucumbers\par
eggs, esp. poached\par
endive\par
fat: bacon, duck\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
lemon, juice\par
lettuces: red oak leaf, red leaf\par
lime, juice\par
maple syrup\par
mushrooms, white\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil: canola, grapeseed, hazelnut, walnut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, red\par
orange, juice\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
salads, esp. warm\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
shallots\par
tangerines and tangerine juice\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: sherry, white wine\par
Dishes\par
Salad \ldblquote Lyonnaise\rdblquote : Italian Fris\'e9e, Applewood Slab Bacon, and Warm\par
Poached Egg, Sherry Wine\f2\endash\f1 Dijon Mustard Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie\par
Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Warm Fris\'e9e and Bacon Salad with Beet Carpaccio and Toasted Walnuts \f2\emdash\f1\par
Lydia Shire, Locke-Ober Caf\'e9 (Boston)\par
Fris\'e9e and Spinach Salad with Dried Cherries, Blue Cheese, Walnuts, and\par
Maple-Sherry Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter, Trotter\rquote s to Go (Chicago)\par
walnuts (accent)\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
fris\'e9e + anchovies + garlic + Parmesan cheese\par
fris\'e9e + bacon + poached egg\par
fris\'e9e + bacon + Roquefort cheese + garlic + shallots + sherry vinegar\par
FRUIT, DRIED (See also Dates, Figs, Raisins, etc.)\par
Taste: sweet\par
Tips: If the fruit is hard, steam before using.\par
apple juice\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
nuts\par
pistachios\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
FRUIT, FRESH (See also specific fruits)\par
Taste: sweet\par
Tips: Sugar enhances the natural flavor of fruit.\par
almonds\par
ginger, fresh\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
sabayon sauce\par
SUGAR\par
vanilla\par
FRUIT, TROPICAL (See also specific fruits, e.g., Mangoes,\par
Papayas, Pineapples, etc.)\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
bananas\par
bourbon\par
caramel\par
chile peppers\par
chocolate\par
chocolate, white\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cream and ice cream\par
five-spice powder\par
ginger\par
guava\par
honey\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
LIME: JUICE, ZEST\par
mangoes\par
melon, honeydew\par
mint\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pineapple\par
pomegranates\par
RUM\par
spirits, white: gin, vodka\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
vanilla\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tropical fruit + coconut + honey + lime\par
tropical fruit + ginger + mint + orange + sugar\par
Tropical fruits are strong flavored, and stand up to chocolate better. At the same\par
time, tropical fruits like bananas or mangoes are not overly sweet fruits, so\par
caramel can stand up to them. With tropical fruits, I will use a little lime juice\par
and often rum as well to help give them a little kick. With mangoes, I use a little\par
light brown sugar \f2\emdash\f1  or I\rquote ll even blend light brown and white sugar together\par
because I\rquote ll want the flavor but not want it to be too harsh.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Dishes\par
Exotic Fruit Salad with Guava Sauce and Phyllo Galettes \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and\par
Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Chocolate Custard Cake with Exotic Fruit Gel\'e9e and Caramelized Bananas\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Tropical Fruit Salad with Rosewater and Sweet Tahini Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Brad\par
Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
GAME \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also Rabbit, Venison)\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, roast\par
Tips: The flavor of cloves adds richness to game.\par
allspice\par
cabbage, red\par
cayenne\par
cherries\par
chestnuts\par
cloves\par
cranberries, dried\par
garlic\par
gin\par
greens\par
Italian cuisine\par
juniper berries\par
lentils\par
Madeira\par
maple syrup\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, Dijon\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
salt, sea\par
stock, beef\par
sugar, brown\par
vinegar\par
wine, red\par
GARAM MASALA\par
Function: warming\par
Tips: Add near the end of the cooking process or before serving.\par
Indian cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cardamom + black pepper + cinnamon + cloves + coriander + cumin +\par
dried chiles + fennel + mace + nutmeg\par
GARLIC\par
Season: year-round\par
Botanical relatives: chives, leeks, onions, shallots\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate (esp. cooked)\f2\endash\f1 loud (esp. raw)\par
Techniques: grill, raw, roast, saut\'e9\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
barbecue\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans\par
beef\par
beets\par
bread\par
broccoli\par
cabbage\par
Cajun cuisine\par
caraway seeds\par
cayenne\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cream, half-and-half\par
Creole cuisine\par
cumin\par
curries\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
When garlic needs to be there, it needs to be there. That includes a lot of dishes,\par
such as lamb. Garlic is also called for with all kinds of vegetables, sauces,\par
pastas, and salads.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I use garlic primarily in two ways: infused into olive oil, or served crispy as a\par
garnish. I\rquote ll use the garlic oil for cooking \f2\emdash\f1  and even if a dish will have garlic\par
added later, I will start with this oil. For crispy brown garlic, you start by slicing\par
it thinly like a chip. The garlic is then put into cold olive oil and cooked until it\par
is just brown. Then, you add parsley, red pepper flakes, and an acid like lemon\par
juice or vinegar to make a vinaigrette. You can even add some stock like a\par
fumet, which is wonderful, too \f2\emdash\f1  served hot, it is great with almost any kind of\par
fish, from something light all the way to oily blue fish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
oil: canola, peanut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika, esp. sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
pepper: black, white\par
pesto (key ingredient)\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads (e.g., Caesar)\par
salt\par
sauces\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
steak\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
Thai cuisine\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES AND TOMATO SAUCE\par
vegetables\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
VINEGAR, esp. balsamic, red wine\par
wine, white\par
zucchini\par
GEORGIAN CUISINE (RUSSIAN)\par
fish\par
garlic\par
meats\par
pepper, red ground\par
pickles\par
pomegranates\par
vinegar\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
coriander + dill + fenugreek (blue) + garlic + red peppers\par
garlic + walnuts\par
GERMAN CUISINE\par
allspice\par
anise\par
bay leaf\par
beer\par
bread, rye\par
caraway seeds\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
dill: seeds, weed\par
fish\par
ginger\par
horseradish\par
juniper berries\par
mace\par
meats, esp. with fruits\par
nutmeg\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley\par
pepper, white\par
poppy seeds\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
sauerbraten\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
sour cream\par
sugar\par
veal\par
vinegar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
caraway + paprika + sour cream\par
caraway + sauerkraut\par
cream + horseradish + fish or meat\par
cream + paprika + poppy seeds\par
dill + cucumbers\par
ginger + sauerbraten\par
juniper berries + game\par
mace + chicken\par
nutmeg + potatoes\par
sugar + vinegar\par
GIN\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
apple brandy\par
apricot brandy\par
basil\par
blackberries\par
celery\par
Champagne\par
Cucumber and mint is a fashionable combination in cocktails, [especially] those\par
with Hendrick\rquote s gin, which has a cucumber flavor. Cucumber is a flavor that\rquote s\par
distinct yet delicate, and very refreshing. It goes beautifully with a range of\par
foods, from Asian cuisine to smoked salmon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRI BANKS, COCKTAIL CONSULTANT (NEW YORK CITY)\par
With gin, or even Martini & Rossi Bianco, I love the combination of\par
blackberries and sage. Blackberries have an indescribable flavor to begin with,\par
and the sage gives them a brooding quality.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRI BANKS, COCKTAIL CONSULTANT (NEW YORK CITY)\par
cilantro\par
Cointreau\par
cola\par
cranberry juice\par
cucumber\par
Cura\'e7ao\par
Earl Grey tea\par
ginger\par
HERBS\par
honey\par
lemon juice\par
lime juice\par
mint\par
orange juice\par
oysters\par
pomegranate\par
pomegranate molasses\par
rose geranium\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
sugar\par
TONIC\par
Flavor Affinities\par
gin + apple brandy + lemon juice + orange juice\par
gin + basil + lemon\par
gin + blackberries + sage\par
gin + cilantro + lime\par
gin + Cointreau + lime + rosemary\par
gin + cucumber + mint\par
gin + Earl Grey tea + lemon + sugar\par
gin + lime + mint\par
gin + lime + mint + pomegranate\par
gin + lime + orange\par
Gin Flavors\par
Beefeater: pear\par
Hendrick\rquote s: cucumber, rose petals\par
Old Raj: saffron\par
Zuidam Dry: orange peel\par
GINGER\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour, hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: bake, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots\par
Arabic cuisine\par
ASIAN CUISINES\par
bananas\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bell peppers, red\par
beverages\par
butter\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cashews\par
celery\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. jalape\'f1o\par
CHINESE CUISINE\par
chocolate, esp. dark, white\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cranberries\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cumin\par
CURRIES\par
custards\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
European cuisines\par
fennel\par
figs\par
FISH\par
fish sauce\par
five-spice powder (key ingredient)\par
garlic\par
grapefruit\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
Dishes\par
Ginger-Honey Gelato\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Ginger-Lemon Drink: Ginger, Lemon, Sugar, Salt, and Pepper \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram\par
Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
HONEY\par
Indian cuisine, esp. curries\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
JAPANESE CUISINE\par
kaffir lime leaves\par
Korean cuisine\par
kumquats\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lemon herbs (e.g., balm, thyme, verbena)\par
LIME, JUICE\par
lobster\par
lychees\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
marinades\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
melon\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
molasses\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
noodles and noodle dishes\par
North African cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
oil: canola, grapeseed\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red\par
orange\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pepper, white\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
plums\par
pork\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rum, esp. dark\par
saffron\par
salad dressings\par
salads, esp. Asian\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces\par
SCALLIONS\par
scallops\par
sesame oil\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
SOY SAUCE\par
star anise\par
steak\par
stews\par
stocks: beef, chicken\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: white, brown\par
sushi and sashimi\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
tea\par
Thai cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
vegetables\par
verbena\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
VINEGAR: champagne, cider, rice wine\par
walnuts\par
wasabi (e.g., with seafood)\par
wine, sweet\par
yogurt\par
yuzu\par
Flavor Affinities\par
ginger + carrot + celery + garlic\par
ginger + chile peppers + garlic\par
ginger + chocolate + cream + rum\par
ginger + cider vinegar + sugar\par
ginger + cilantro + garlic + scallions\par
ginger + cream + honey\par
ginger + lemon + mint\par
ginger + lemon + pepper + salt + sugar\par
GINGER, GROUND\par
Taste: pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Asian cuisine\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, cakes, cookies)\par
bananas\par
beverages\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
chutneys\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
couscous\par
cream and ice cream\par
desserts\par
Ginger and honey is one of my favorite flavor combinations.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I\rquote ll use ginger more for its heat than its sweetness. For example, I\rquote ll juice it to\par
add to a carrot or squash puree, which gives it heat and backbone.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
Dishes\par
Gingersnap-Lemon Ice Cream Sandwiches\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Ginger is great on its own, but also works great with other flavors. It\rquote s one of\par
those \ldblquote wake up\rdblquote  flavors that you can hide beneath all sorts of other flavors. I\par
think it works especially well with citrus. It works with yuzu, passion fruit,\par
coconut, banana, and other tropical flavors.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
My mom always had candied ginger in the spice cupboard when I was growing\par
up. Today at the restaurant, we take candied ginger and combine it with whatever\par
fruit is in season \f2\emdash\f1  from nectarines, to cherries, to quince \f2\emdash\f1  and then add Vin\par
Santo to make a sauce for our foie gras. Vin Santo brings nuttiness and candied\par
ginger brings spice that both cut through the fat of the foie gras. I think\par
nectarines and candied ginger are a perfect flavor combination.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOLLY SMITH, CAF\'c9 JUANITA (SEATTLE)\par
fruits\par
gingerbread (key ingredient)\par
ham\par
honey\par
lemon\par
meats, esp. braised or stewed\par
melon\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
onions\par
oranges\par
paprika\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
rice\par
saffron\par
squash, winter\par
stewed dishes\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
tomatoes\par
GOAT CHEESE (See Cheese, Goat)\par
GRAPEFRUIT\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: bake, broil, raw\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bananas\par
butter, unsalted\par
Campari\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
ceviche\par
Champagne\par
chicken\par
coconut\par
crab\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
fromage blanc\par
gin\par
ginger, fresh\par
Grand Marnier\par
grenadine syrup\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime\par
macadamia nuts\par
melons\par
meringue\par
mint, fresh\par
miso\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. spring\par
orange\par
papaya\par
pecans\par
pineapple\par
pomegranate\par
poppy seeds\par
port\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
salads, esp. fruit\par
salmon\par
seafood\par
seaweed\par
shrimp\par
sorbet\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
tarragon\par
tequila\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, champagne\par
vodka\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine, sparkling, white\par
yogurt\par
Dishes\par
Yuzu Cream, Caramelized Rice, Grapefruit, Green Tea Ice Cream, Crisp\par
Meringue, Malted Rum Milk Chocolate Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis,\par
pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York City) We serve a dish of grapefruit, crab\par
salad, and mint. Grapefruit is sweet and a little bitter, which makes it fun to play\par
with. I like mint in the dish because it refreshes and wakes your palate up. When\par
you get a little taste of mint it brings up the other flavors of the dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love tarragon with grapefruit. It is a classic.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I have served a grapefruit and seaweed crab salad with miso dressing. I also\par
like grapefruit with asparagus.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
grapefruit + avocado + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
grapefruit + caramel + meringue\par
grapefruit + crab + miso + seaweed\par
grapefruit + fromage blanc + pomegranate\par
grapefruit + mint + sugar\par
grapefruit + star anise + yogurt\par
GRAPES\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
almonds\par
apples\par
arugula\par
brandy\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE, esp. blue, cow\rquote s milk, goat\rquote s milk\par
chicken\par
chocolate, white\par
cognac\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
curry leaf\par
duck\par
endive\par
fennel seeds\par
fish\par
game, esp. roasted\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lemon\par
mint\par
mustard seeds\par
olive oil\par
paprika\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pistachios\par
pork, esp. roasted\par
poultry, esp. roasted\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
salads, esp. chicken, fruit, tuna, Waldorf\par
salt\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
vinegar, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, white\par
yogurt\par
GREEK CUISINE (See also Mediterranean Cuisines)\par
allspice\par
anise\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
CHEESE: FETA, goat, sheep\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
custard\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
GARLIC\par
grape leaves\par
honey\par
kebabs\par
I never mess with the flavor of Concord grapes; I always just make them into a\par
sorbet. I was upstate in my cabin when the first Concord grapes came into\par
season. I wanted sorbet so badly that I cut one of my T-shirts in half to use as a\par
strainer, and then used my broom handle with the shirt to squeeze every last bit\par
of juice from the grapes. The sorbet was awesome!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, JEAN GEORGES (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Mediterranean \ldblquote Greek Salad\rdblquote  of Mt. Vikos Feta, Kalamata Olives, Plum\par
Tomatoes, Cucumbers, Torn Mint, and Oregano with Warm Feta Cheese\par
\ldblquote Turnover\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
LAMB\par
LEMON\par
meats, esp. grilled, roasted\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
octopus\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
phyllo dough\par
pine nuts\par
pita bread\par
pork\par
raisins\par
rice\par
salads, esp. with mint\par
shellfish\par
spinach\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cucumber + dill + garlic + yogurt\par
dill + lemon\par
dill + lemon + olive oil\par
dill + yogurt\par
eggplant + custard + garlic + meat\par
eggplant + garlic + olive oil\par
eggs + lemon\par
lamb + garlic + lemon + oregano\par
lemon + olive oil\par
lemon + olive oil + oregano\par
lemon + oregano\par
phyllo dough + honey + nuts\par
rice + grape leaves\par
rice + nuts\par
spinach + feta cheese\par
tomatoes + cinnamon\par
yogurt + cinnamon\par
GREEN BEANS (See Beans, Green)\par
GREENS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also specific greens)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: blanch, raw, saut\'e9, steam\par
allspice\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
butter\par
caraway seeds\par
celery or celery seeds\par
CHEESE, esp. grated (e.g., Asiago, Jack, Parmesan)\par
chicory\par
chili sauce\par
coriander\par
corn\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
fennel\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
ham\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
legumes\par
lemon, juice\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
nuts, toasted\par
oil: mustard, nut, peanut, sesame\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions, green\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pomegranates\par
potatoes, esp. new and/or red\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
sage\par
salads\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish: oysters, esp. fried, shrimp\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine\par
GREENS, COLLARD\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, kale,\par
kohlrabi\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, steam, stir-fry\par
Dishes\par
A Simple Salad of Beautiful Greens, Forelli Pears, Pomegranate, and Saba\par
Balsamic \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
It\rquote s hard to even think about bitter greens without thinking about toasted nuts.\par
You can get the flavor from the nuts themselves, or from toasted nut oils, which\par
are balanced by the bright fruitiness of cider vinegar.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
bacon\par
black-eyed peas\par
brown butter\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
garlic\par
ham hocks\par
mustard seeds\par
oil: peanut, vegetable\par
onions, yellow\par
oregano\par
pepper, black\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt\par
salt pork\par
soul food cuisine\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, cider\par
GREENS, DANDELION\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, saut\'e9, steam\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
garlic\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil, peanut\par
onions\par
pepper, ground\par
salads\par
salt\par
vinegar\par
GREENS, KALE (See Kale)\par
GREENS, MUSTARD\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, grill, stew, wilt\par
Asian cuisine\par
bacon\par
black-eyed peas\par
Chinese cuisine\par
ham hocks\par
oil, sesame\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
prosciutto\par
salads\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
soy sauce\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mustard greens + bacon + onions\par
mustard greens + garlic + olive oil + prosciutto\par
mustard greens + sesame oil + soy sauce\par
GREENS, SALAD (See also Lettuce, Sorrel, Watercress, etc.)\par
Season: late spring\par
bacon\par
cheese\par
croutons\par
fruit: apples, pears\par
garlic\par
olive oil\par
pepper, black\par
salt\par
vinegar: red wine, sherry\par
A salad is a tricky thing to season. If you put the salt on too early, it will wilt the\par
greens. You have to be careful not to leach it of its life!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Dishes\par
Wild Dandelion Greens with Anchovy Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  David Pasternak, Esca\par
(New York City)\par
GREENS, TURNIP\par
Season: fall\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Techniques: boil, braise\par
bacon\par
black-eyed peas\par
eggs\par
ham hocks\par
onions\par
Dishes\par
Turnip Green and Onion Soup with Poached Egg \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni Caf\'e9\par
(San Francisco)\par
GRILLED DISHES\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
bell peppers\par
chicken\par
corn, esp. on the cob\par
eggplant\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fish, whole\par
garlic\par
hamburgers\par
hot dogs\par
lamb: butterflied, chops\par
lobster\par
mushrooms\par
onions\par
pineapple\par
pork: chops, loin\par
salmon\par
sausages\par
shrimp, esp. skewered\par
squash, summer\par
steaks\par
swordfish\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
turkey: breasts\par
veal: chops, steaks\par
zucchini\par
GRITS\par
Techniques: simmer\par
cheese: cheddar, Parmesan\par
corn\par
cream\par
garlic\par
mascarpone\par
nutmeg\par
pepper, black\par
salt\par
sausage, andouille\par
shrimp (to accompany)\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
GROUPER\par
Season: spring\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam,\par
stir-fry\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, red\par
bok choy\par
butter\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese, Asiago\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, Anaheim\par
chili sauce\par
cucumber\par
endive\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mushrooms, porcini\par
oil: corn, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, picholine\par
onions, white\par
oyster sauce\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
port\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, sea\par
sesame, seeds\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: chicken, fish, pork\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vermouth, dry\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
wine: red, white\par
zucchini\par
GUAVAS\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, juice, poach\par
BANANAS\par
cashews\par
cheese\par
chocolate, white\par
coconut\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
curry powder\par
ginger\par
ham\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mascarpone\par
oil, vegetable\par
onions, yellow\par
orange\par
passion fruit\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
poultry\par
raisins\par
rum\par
salads, fruit\par
sauces\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, white\par
Dishes\par
Grilled American Red Grouper on Crab Hash, Pancetta\f2\endash\f1 Red Onion\par
Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Sanford D\rquote Amato, Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
HADDOCK (See Cod)\par
HALIBUT\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, grill, pan roast, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
aioli (sauce)\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples: cider, fruit, juice\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beans: black, fava, haricots verts\par
bell peppers: red, yellow\par
bok choy\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots and carrot juice\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
chamomile\par
chard\par
chervil\par
chicory\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
coriander\par
cornichons\par
couscous\par
cream\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek seeds\par
fris\'e9e\par
garam masala\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, ground\par
grapefruit\par
hazelnuts\par
horseradish\par
kohlrabi\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, preserved\par
lemon balm\par
lime, juice\par
lovage\par
mint\par
mushrooms, esp. oyster, porcini, portobello, shiitake\par
mussels\par
mustard: Dijon, dry, grainy\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, ni\'e7oise\par
onions, esp. pearl, red, spring\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes, esp. new (e.g., fried, mashed)\par
pumpkin seeds\par
red pepper flakes\par
rhubarb\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
savory\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds: black, white\par
SHALLOTS\par
sorrel\par
spearmint\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, fish\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tamarind\par
tapanade\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
turmeric\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
WINE: dry red, dry white (e.g., Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc), vermouth\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Halibut from the East Coast is the most delicate and silky fish. It is different\par
than Alaskan halibut, which is drier, meatier, and more robust. East Coast halibut\par
is so delicate that anything can kill it. That is why we steam and poach so much\par
here: Even searing it too strongly in the pan will hurt a piece of halibut.\par
We\rquote ll poach halibut, then serve it with a blood orange vinaigrette made with\par
extra-virgin olive oil, which gives it a round and full flavor. The fish is then\par
served atop a carpaccio of golden beets that have been cooked in sherry vinegar.\par
The beets have a sweet-and-sour flavor to them. They are also very crunchy,\par
which I like with the creamy texture of the halibut. The vinaigrette brings the\par
right degree of acidity to the dish to make it exciting.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Halibut is a gentle-tasting fish, which leads to gentle herbs like cilantro, chives,\par
or chervil.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Dishes\par
Wellfleet Line-Caught Halibut, Sweet Corn, Shiitake Mushrooms, and\par
Lemon Thyme Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Upstairs (New York City)\par
Almond-Crusted Halibut with Parsnip Puree, Fava Beans, Haricots Verts,\par
and Wild Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Danube (New York City)\par
Halibut: Braised Tomato, Olives, Escarole, and Spring Salad \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud/Bertrand Chemel, Caf\'e9 Boulud (New York City) Olive Oil\f2\endash\f1 Poached\par
Halibut with Star Route Farm\rquote s Fava Beans, Fennel Salad, and Ni\'e7oise\par
Olives \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Alaskan Halibut, Potato, and Black Pepper Crust \f2\emdash\f1  Hubert Keller, Fleur de\par
Lys (San Francisco)\par
Alaskan Halibut on a Bed of Creamy Leeks with Asparagus Puree, Fines\par
Herbe, Spring Ramps, Favas, and English Peas \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Kinkead\rquote s\par
(Washington, DC)\par
Chermoula Halibut with Red Quinoa, Edamame, and Shell Bean Salad with\par
Preserved Lemon Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Halibut with Morel Mushrooms, English Peas, and Fingerling Potatoes \f2\emdash\f1\par
Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Halibut, Kohlrabi, Celery, Verbena-Lime Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Michel Richard,\par
Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
Halibut Poached with Sweet-and-Sour Golden and Red Beets, Citrus and\par
Extra-Virgin Olive Oil Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York\par
City)\par
Alaskan Halibut Braised in the Brick Oven with Marble Potatoes, Baby\par
Carrots, English Peas, Butter, and Cilantro \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni Caf\'e9 (San\par
Francisco)\par
Line-Caught Seal Rock Halibut, Leek Emulsion, Reduced Chardonnay,\par
Bacon Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
halibut + anchovies + black olives\par
halibut + anchovies + garlic + lemon + sorrel\par
halibut + apples + celery root + parsnips\par
halibut + beets + blood orange + olive oil + sherry vinegar\par
halibut + bok choy + sesame seeds\par
halibut + chicory + grapefruit\par
halibut + coriander + fennel + lemon\par
halibut + garlic + lemon + sorrel\par
halibut + scallions + white wine\par
HAM\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud (depending on smokiness)\par
Techniques: bake, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
apples and applesauce\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
breakfast / brunch\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: cheddar, Emmental, Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, Jack, manchego,\par
mozzarella, Parmesan, Swiss\par
chestnuts\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
corn\par
cornmeal\par
French cuisine\par
eggs\par
garlic\par
greens\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine, esp. with prosciutto di Parma\par
macaroni\par
maple syrup\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
orange, juice\par
parsley\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
sage\par
Dishes\par
Raviolis of Virginia Country Ham and Fontina Cheese \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell,\par
The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) Serrano Ham with\par
Roasted Onions, Manchego Cheese, and Watercress \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter,\par
Trotter\rquote s to Go (Chicago)\par
Virtually all vegetables \f2\emdash\f1  from asparagus to green beans \f2\emdash\f1  pair well with ham\par
because of its natural saltiness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
One of the happiest trios in the flavor world is Ib\'e9rico ham, manchego cheese,\par
and manzanilla sherry.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ADRIAN MURCIA, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
If you are a first timer, the only thing you should combine with Ib\'e9rico ham is\par
the warmth of your tongue. Just let it rest on your tongue and let your 37 degrees\par
Celsius do the rest! You can use just the fat of Ib\'e9rico ham melted in a pan and\par
make scrambled eggs or a tortilla, and it will add amazing flavor and aroma.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
sauce, Mornay\par
scallions\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine: dry sherry, Madeira red, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
ham + cheese + mustard\par
ham + honey + soy sauce\par
ham + Jack cheese + greens + mushrooms\par
ham + mozzarella cheese + red onion\par
HAM, IB\'e9RICO\par
cheese, pressed sheep\rquote s milk (e.g., manchego)\par
HAM, SERRANO\par
asparagus\par
beans, green\par
cheese, manchego\par
olive oil\par
peppers, piquillo\par
Spanish cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
HAZELNUT OIL (See Oil, Hazelnut)\par
HAZELNUTS\par
Taste: sweet, salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
asparagus\par
bananas\par
beets\par
berries\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
cheese: feta, goat, Gruy\'e8re, ricotta, Taleggio\par
cherries\par
chestnuts\par
CHOCOLATE, esp. dark or white\par
cinnamon\par
cocoa powder\par
coffee / espresso\par
cognac\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream cheese\par
custard\par
dates\par
figs\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
hazelnut oil\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
kiwi\par
lemon\par
liqueur: almond (e.g., amaretto), hazelnut (e.g., Frangelico), orange\par
mango\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pastries\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pecans\par
persimmons\par
plums\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quail\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
sauces\par
soups\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, confectioner\rquote s, granulated\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
VANILLA\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, sweet, white\par
HERBES DE PROVENCE\par
French cuisine, southern\par
meats\par
stews, esp. vegetable\par
vegetables\par
Flavor Affinities\par
basil + fennel seeds + lavender + marjoram + rosemary + sage + summer\par
savory + thyme\par
Dishes\par
Chocolate-Hazelnut Cake with Orange Sauce and Hazelnut Gelato \f2\emdash\f1  Gina\par
DePalma, Babbo (New York City)\par
Hazelnut and Chocolate Souffl\'e9\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Odette Fada, San Domenico (New York City)\par
Gianduja Napoleon with Chocolate-Hazelnut Ganache, Frozen Caramel\par
Mousse, Crispy Hazelnut Nougatine \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru (Chicago)\par
Hazelnuts have a complicated flavor, though not as complicated as walnuts.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
Hazelnuts are from the north and are used in Piedmontese cooking. Hazelnuts\par
are very rich and round and buttery, so I will use them to achieve a rich, fatty\par
quality in my dessert. Hazelnuts with chocolate are a natural. Hazelnut with\par
grapes are great; it\rquote s like peanut butter and jelly!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I am more of an herb guy than a spice guy. It comes back to a certain\par
conservatism I have regarding food. The French are not big on spices; they use\par
more herbs. I know the spices used in European cooking and use them in\par
moderation. I am not going to serve a dish that is wildly nutmegged!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
HERBS (See specific herbs)\par
Herbs 101 with Jerry Traunfeld of The Herbfarm, Woodinville,\par
Washington\par
Working with herbs is very different from working with spices. With herbs, you\par
can really only work with a few at a time. With spices, you can throw so many\par
more together. An Indian dish may have more than a dozen spices in it. Here are\par
some guidelines: \f2\bullet\f1  Know your herb. Herbs range in intensity, so you need to\par
know the profile of the herb you are choosing at the start. You need to be careful;\par
for example, if you add rosemary to chervil it will overpower the chervil.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  You want to pair delicate with delicate or strong with strong. Chervil is\par
possibly the most delicate herb. Lemon basil and lemon thyme would be in the\par
middle. Lemon verbena or tarragon I would consider loud. Then you have bay\par
leaf which is light, until you add twenty together and it becomes strong.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Not all herbs are created equal, and they can vary within their categories or\par
season. Oregano can be mild, or hot and spicy. With mint, applemint is mild\par
while peppermint is strong. The season also has an effect on rosemary: in the\par
winter, rosemary is mild and in the summer, it is strong.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Herbs have regional affinities. Mediterranean herbs marry well together.\par
Rosemary and marjoram or thyme and savory are naturals together. Among\par
Asian herbs, lemongrass goes with mint and cilantro or mint and chives. In\par
France, you have lots of combinations: chervil, tarragon, chives, and parsley.\par
The one exception to France\rquote s herbs is tarragon, which is probably best on its\par
own.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Herbs also have seasonal affinities. Summer vegetables work with summer\par
herbs, as do winter vegetables with winter herbs. In summer, it is basil or\par
marjoram with tomatoes. Basil with zucchini is one of my favorite combinations.\par
In winter, sage and rosemary work with potatoes and root vegetables. Also in\par
winter, one of my favorite combinations is butternut squash with bay leaf and\par
nutmeg. Pumpkin and bay leaf together make the pumpkin taste even more\par
pumpkin-like.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  How to use the chosen herb. Soft-leaved herbs \f2\emdash\f1  such as basil, chervil, chives,\par
cilantro, dill, lovage, and sorrel \f2\emdash\f1  shouldn\rquote t be cooked because they will lose\par
their flavor. Tough-leaved herbs \f2\emdash\f1  such as bay leaf, savory, and rosemary \f2\emdash\f1\par
can go into dishes and stand up to heat and cooking.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Choose an herb that is the same intensity as your protein. Halibut is a gentletasting fish, which leads to gentle herbs like cilantro, chives, or chervil. Smelt is\par
a local fish that is oily, so here we look to stronger herbs like oregano, savory, or\par
rosemary.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Herbs aren\rquote t exclusive to savory dishes. Anise hyssop works with most stone\par
fruits like peaches. Cinnamon basil works with blue huckleberries. Cinnamon\par
with blueberries really intensifies the flavor of the blueberry. Lavender works\par
with plums or peaches. Lemony herbs like basil or anise hyssop work with\par
watermelon. Rosemary works with apples or pears. Sage works with tart\par
cherries. Tarragon works with muskmelon.\par
We grow forty different tomatoes and eight different basils. Our farmer planted\par
the tomatoes surrounded by the basil, and I thought he did it because they taste\par
good together. It turns out that doing so attracts beneficial insects to each. Our\par
farmer believes that tomato and basil work so well on the plate because they\par
work so well in the field. He also explained that if you plant certain basils next\par
to tomatoes, you can taste it in the tomato.\par
All our cooks take care of their own section of the herb garden. The gardemanger cooks [who prepare appetizers] look after the chives and chervil. The\par
fish cooks care for the lemon herbs like lemon thyme and lemongrass, and the\par
meat cooks for the rosemary, sage, and thyme. Our pastry cooks tend the edible\par
flowers that can be candied, and mint and lemon verbena, which they use in\par
sorbets.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAN BARBER, BLUE HILL AT STONE BARNS (POCANTICO HILLS, NEW YORK)\par
I am a big fan of roasting and resting meat on herbs. If you roast a rib eye, prime\par
rib, or filet mignon, most people would put it on a sheet tray with a roasting\par
rack. One day, I didn\rquote t have a roasting rack but I had a lot of thyme and savory\par
and rosemary, so I threw the meat on top and roasted it. The technique did the\par
trick by keeping the meat from the juices and it also enhanced the flavor that\par
much more. Since then, we have stopped using roasting racks for our meats and\par
switched to herbs. During the roasting process, I like to turn the meat so that the\par
flavor of the herbs penetrates even more. Since you are roasting in a closed oven,\par
the air circulates the herb flavor.\par
For a lamb shoulder, if you can\rquote t get hay, I would recommend using savory,\par
thyme, sage, and rosemary. This technique is great for a whole chicken: slice\par
some truffles to put under the chicken skin, brush it with butter, and put it on a\par
bed of savory and thyme. It will be pretty incredible.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VITALY PALEY, PALEY\rquote S PLACE (PORTLAND, OREGON)\par
HONEY\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
baked goods (e.g., biscuits, breads)\par
bananas\par
brandy\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
carrots\par
cheese: goat, ricotta, soft\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
currants, red\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
figs, esp. dried\par
fruit\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
guava\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
I might grab honey when I am working with nutty flavors or to macerate some\par
fruit. You can also scorch honey to create a whole new flavor; one of my favorite\par
dishes is a burnt honey caramelized pistachio ice cream.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I use honey as a flavor, not as a sweetener like sugar. In my honey panna cotta, I\par
add some sugar to make it sweet enough. If I used only honey as a sweetener, the\par
flavor of honey would be too strong and the panna cotta would taste a little flat.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
I like the combination of fresh pineapple topped with warm honey. I will glaze\par
my raspberry tart with flower honey, and my apple tart with chestnut honey.\par
Chestnut honey gives a rustic flavor that goes well with the apple.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Lavender Honey-Roasted Pig with Spiced Banana Puree \f2\emdash\f1  Sandy D\rquote Amato,\par
Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
Honey Semifreddo with Tropical Consomm\'e9, Fresh Coconut, and Bloomed\par
Basil Seeds \f2\emdash\f1  Celina Tio, American Restaurant (Kansas City)\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
LIME, juice\par
liqueur, orange (e.g., Grand Marnier)\par
lychees\par
mascarpone\par
melon\par
Middle Eastern cuisines\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
NUTS\par
oats\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
papaya\par
pastries\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pomegranate\par
pork\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
red pepper flakes\par
rhubarb\par
rum\par
sage\par
sauces\par
Southern cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
tequila\par
thyme\par
Turkish cuisine\par
VANILLA\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine: red, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
honey + almonds + chicken + pomegranate\par
honey + bananas + lavender + pork\par
honey + cream + pistachios\par
honey + fruit + yogurt\par
HONEY, BLUEBERRY\par
cheese, esp. cheddar\par
HONEY, CHESTNUT\par
Taste: sweet-bitter\par
cheese, esp. goat, ricotta, triple cr\'e8me\par
HONEY, RASPBERRY\par
cheese, esp. cheddar\par
HONEYDEW\par
Season: midsummer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
basil\par
blackberries\par
cardamom\par
Champagne\par
chiles\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
figs\par
Dishes\par
Honeydew-Mint Sorbet with Fresh Blackberries \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry\par
chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Honeydew Melon Salad with Oven-Roasted Tomatoes, Goat Cheese, and\par
Pistachios \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon basil\par
lime\par
melon, cantaloupe\par
milk\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
peaches\par
red pepper flakes\par
pepper: black, white\par
prosciutto\par
ricotta cheese\par
salt (pinch)\par
scallions\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
wine, sweet\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
honeydew melon + figs + mint + prosciutto\par
HORSERADISH\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: pungent, hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: very loud\par
Tips: Use horseradish raw or add at end of cooking process.\par
Heat diminishes the pungency of horseradish.\par
apples, esp. Golden Delicious\par
apricots\par
Austrian cuisine\par
avocados\par
BEEF, ESP. CORNED OR ROAST\par
beets\par
celery\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
corn\par
CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
Eastern European cuisine\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fish, esp. oily, smoked\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
ham\par
ketchup\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
mascarpone\par
mayonnaise\par
meats, esp. cold\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
oxtails\par
oysters\par
parsley\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
Russian cuisine\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sauces\par
sausage\par
shellfish\par
sour cream\par
steak\par
Heating grated horseradish changes the horseradish completely. It makes it\par
more mellow and takes away the bite while keeping its yummy flavor.\par
Horseradish prepared this way works well with Nantucket Bay scallops that are\par
naturally sweet and work with the sweetness of the horseradish. We will also use\par
it in a lemony vinaigrette and dress a smoked trout with it.\par
First, grate horseradish on a microplane [a fine grater]. Coat a ten-inch skillet\par
with some Ligurian olive oil, and heat the horseradish over medium heat. Watch\par
it very closely, because the minute it starts to turn from its blond color, it is done.\par
From there, transfer it into cold pans to cool it quickly. When it is totally cool\par
and has its crunch, add some lemon zest and kosher salt.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOLLY SMITH, Caf\'e9 Juanita (Seattle)\par
sugar\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
trout\par
vinegar\par
walnuts\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
horseradish + apples + pork + sour cream\par
horseradish + beef + beets\par
horseradish + beets + cream cheese\par
horseradish + garlic + olive oil\par
horseradish + salt + vinegar\par
horseradish + seafood + tomatoes\par
HOTNESS (of indoor or outdoor temperature; see also Summer)\par
chilled dishes and beverages\par
fish\par
grilled dishes\par
herbs, esp. cooling\par
olive oil\f2\endash\f1 based dishes\par
raw dishes\par
salads, esp. fruit, vegetable\par
If it is hot outside, I make sure there are lots of salads on the menu.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
salsas, fresh\par
seafood\par
soups, cold\par
vegetables, esp. green leafy\par
HUNGARIAN CUISINE\par
bacon\par
beef\par
bell peppers, green\par
caraway seeds\par
chile peppers\par
garlic\par
ham\par
lard\par
mushrooms\par
ONIONS\par
PAPRIKA\par
pork\par
pork fat\par
potatoes\par
sausage\par
SOUR CREAM\par
tomatoes\par
wheat\par
wine, esp. Tokaji Aszu\par
Flavor Affinities\par
onions + paprika\par
onions + paprika + pork fat\par
onions + paprika + sour cream\par
HYSSOP\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: strong\par
beans, green\par
beef\par
beets\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
cranberries\par
eggs\par
fruits\par
lamb\par
meats\par
parsley\par
pork\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
salads: fruit, green\par
soups, esp. chicken\par
stews\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turkey, esp. stuffed and roasted\par
vegetables\par
venison\par
In Eastern European or Hungarian cooking, you will see a stewed or braised\par
dish flavored with paprika that is cut with sour cream either in it or served on top\par
so that it mixes together as you eat it. I serve rare roasted venison in venison\par
stock with hot and sweet paprika that is essentially a goulash. Alongside, I serve\par
creamed sauerkraut that bleeds into the sauce and gives the same effect as a\par
goulash. Even though the sauerkraut has an intense flavor, it is still mild because\par
it has been cooked in cream. It is not a Hungarian dish but rather a play on a\par
Hungarian dish, and it works in the context of the subtler intensity of flavors I\par
like.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Tomatoes are as important to making Indian cuisine as they are to making\par
Italian cuisine. In fact, making an Indian curry is a lot like making an Italian\par
tomato sauce.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MEERU DHALWALA, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
If my mind is in India, tamarind will be sneaking its way into the dish. When\par
thinking of India, my inspirations are the flavors of clove, cardamom, and\par
coriander seed. They are aromatic spices that really cut the fat of the dish, so it is\par
not big, fat, and flabby on the palate.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I worked in an Indian restaurant as a waiter for four years. I love cooking with\par
Indian ingredients. Everything I learned at the CIA was thrown out the window\par
when I learned Indian cooking, which is where I picked up many techniques and\par
philosophies. I now roast my own spices and create spice blends. I love creating\par
my own flavor combinations. I came to love a garam masala made with fennel,\par
cinnamon, clove, cumin, and coriander. Each of these five spices has a\par
distinctive flavor, but combined they create one single flavor that is amazing. I\par
will use my garam masala mixture in soups and sauces. When people ask about\par
the dish, they always ask, \ldblquote What was that flavor?\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
INDIAN CUISINE\par
allspice\par
almonds, esp. in desserts\par
anise\par
breads, in the north\par
cardamom\par
cauliflower\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro, esp. in the south\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut, esp. in the south and/or in desserts\par
coriander\par
cumin, esp. in the north\par
CURRIES\par
curry leaf\par
eggplant\par
fenugreek\par
garlic, esp. in the north\par
ghee (clarified butter)\par
ginger, esp. in the north\par
herbs\par
lamb\par
lentils\par
mint\par
mustard seeds, esp. in the south\par
nutmeg\par
oil: canola, grapeseed\par
paprika\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
pistachios, esp. in desserts\par
poppy seeds\par
potatoes\par
rice, basmati, esp. in the south\par
saffron\par
sage\par
SPICES\par
spinach\par
tamarind, esp. in the south\par
TOMATOES\par
turmeric\par
vegetables, esp. in the south\par
wheat, esp. in the north\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
beef, for religious reasons, say some\par
pork, for religious reasons, say some\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cinnamon + cloves + mace + nutmeg\par
coriander + cumin + turmeric\par
coriander + cumin + yogurt\par
cumin + garlic + ginger\par
cumin + garlic + yogurt\par
garlic + ginger\par
garlic + ginger + onion\par
potatoes + chili powder + turmeric\par
yogurt + fruit\par
INDONESIAN CUISINE\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
fish\par
garlic\par
grilled dishes\par
lemongrass\par
molasses\par
noodles\par
peanuts\par
pepper\par
rice\par
shellfish\par
shrimp paste\par
soy sauce\par
spices, esp. clove, nutmeg, pepper\par
stir-fried dishes\par
sugar, brown\par
vegetables\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + peanuts + soy sauce\par
garlic + peanuts + soy sauce\par
garlic + soy sauce + brown sugar\par
IRANIAN CUISINE (aka Persian Cuisine)\par
apricots\par
basil\par
beans\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
dates\par
dill\par
duck\par
fish\par
garlic\par
herbs\par
kebabs\par
lamb\par
lime\par
meats\par
mint\par
nuts\par
onions\par
parsley\par
plums\par
pomegranates\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
rice\par
saffron\par
stews\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cardamom + cinnamon + cloves + cumin + ginger + rose\par
duck + pomegranates + walnuts\par
ITALIAN CUISINE \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
basil\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
capers\par
cheese: mozzarella, Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta\par
chicken\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fish\par
garlic\par
grappa\par
greens\par
honey, esp. in desserts\par
lemon, esp. in desserts\par
Marsala\par
mascarpone, esp. in desserts\par
mushrooms\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
orange and orange zest, esp. in desserts\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pork\par
prosciutto\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. in desserts\par
saffron\par
sage\par
sausage\par
shellfish\par
spinach\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
veal\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
wine\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
anchovies + capers + lemon juice\par
anchovies + garlic + wine vinegar\par
basil + garlic + olive oil\par
basil + garlic + tomatoes\par
bell peppers + olive oil + tomatoes\par
capers + garlic + wine vinegar\par
garlic + olive oil + parsley\par
garlic + oregano + tomatoes\par
garlic + saffron + shellfish\par
red pepper flakes + fennel + sausage\par
ITALIAN CUISINE, NORTHERN\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
beans\par
butter\par
cheeses, creamy and rich\par
cream and cream-based sauces\par
cured meats\par
fish\par
goat\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon, juice\par
Marsala\par
nuts\par
pasta, esp. richer egg-based and/or ribbon-shaped, often combined with\par
other starches such as beans\par
pine nuts\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
rice and risotto\par
truffles, white\par
vinegar, esp. wine\par
wine\par
ITALIAN CUISINE, SOUTHERN\par
bell peppers\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
marjoram\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil, heavy\par
oregano\par
pasta, esp. tube-shaped and with tomato sauce\par
pizza\par
pork\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
sardines\par
sausage\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
I only half joke that if you add rum or orange zest to a dessert, it will taste\par
Italian. They are very common flavors in Italy.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
There are five ingredients that any Italian cook must use: 1) real Italian pasta; 2)\par
extra-virgin olive oil; 3) real balsamic vinegar; 4) Italian prosciutto; and 5)\par
Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARIO BATALI, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Holly Smith of Caf\'e9 Juanita in Seattle on Five Flavors that Will\par
Take You to Northern Italy\par
White Truffles. The perfect vehicle for white truffles is hand-cut pasta that is\par
egg rich. Eggs that taste like real eggs make a great pasta. Our pasta is egg rich\par
and has 35 egg yolks to a kilo (2.2 pounds) of flour. You can get them in there, it\par
is crazy! The pasta looks like a sunset. On the pasta, I would first put butter\par
barely scented with sage, before shaving the truffles on top.\par
Nebbiolo. Beef cheeks braised in Nebbiolo [wine]. To keep it simple, we\par
serve roasted turnips and the reduced sauce with pomegranate seeds and that\rquote s it.\par
We braise our cheeks for seven and a half hours. Most braised dishes go four\par
hours, but not beef cheeks \f2\emdash\f1  anything less, and they are [still tough].\par
Anchovies. I love a really acidic anchovy vinaigrette for a bread salad.\par
Anchovies with roasted garlic are like butter at this restaurant; they go in lots of\par
dishes. We put them in lamb, we put them in between potatoes with chicken\par
stock for a gratin. We love them. I like anchovies with sage on each side deep\par
fried for an appetizer. We cook anchovies in olive oil with a little butter until\par
they get toasty, throw in onions to caramelize, and serve this with fish.\par
Hazelnuts. Chocolate and hazelnut is the perfect combination so we make\par
gianduja and put it inside crepes and warm them and put chestnut honey on top.\par
Most of the time hazelnuts end up in salad or ground for a final dusting for a\par
pasta. Beet pasta that looks like candy wrappers is served on top of a warm plate\par
that has just been smeared with Gorgonzola Piccante, then topped with ground\par
hazelnuts just before it is served. Blue cheese and hazelnuts is it for me.\par
Goat Meat. I just had spit-roasted goat at Da Cesare. If I knew I was going to\par
die, I would get myself there [to the Piedmont region of Italy]. Roasted goat\par
basted with garlic, olive oil, marjoram, mint, or rosemary is it.\par
JAMAICAN CUISINE (See also Caribbean Cuisines)\par
jerked dishes (e.g., chicken)\par
JAPANESE CUISINE\par
bonito: dried, flakes\par
broiled dishes\par
chile peppers\par
daikon\par
dashi (kelp-based stock)\par
fish, cooked and raw\par
ginger\par
kelp\par
mirin (sweet rice wine)\par
noodles\par
pickles\par
poached dishes\par
ponzu sauce\par
rice\par
sake\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shellfish\par
*SOY SAUCE\par
steamed dishes\par
tea\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
wasabi\par
wine, rice\par
yuzu\par
Flavor Affinities\par
bonito flakes + kelp\par
garlic + ginger + soy sauce\par
ginger + scallions + soy sauce\par
sake + soy sauce + sugar\par
soy sauce + wasabi\par
JICAMA\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: cooked (e.g., stir-fry), raw\par
avocado\par
cabbage, green\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
*CHILE PEPPERS\par
chili powder\par
Japanese cuisine is very simple. We don\rquote t mix too many ingredients together.\par
One of the main ingredients we use in Japanese cooking is soy sauce, for both its\par
saltiness and umami. Soy sauce is very complex: It takes months and months to\par
make it. Same for the dried bonito used to make dashi, our Japanese broth. So\par
Japanese chefs find that much of the hardest work has already been done for us!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KAZ OKOCHI, KAZ SUSHI BISTRO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Jicama Callejera: Crunchy Jicama with Oranges, Grapefruit, and\par
Pineapple; Orange-Lime Vinaigrette and Fresh Limes to Squeeze On \f2\emdash\f1\par
Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Ensalada de Jicama y Aguacate: Jicama, Grapefruit, and Avocado Salad\par
with Pumpkin Seeds \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Mijita (San Francisco)\par
Seaweed and Jicama Salad with Ginger Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi\par
Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
fish\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
ketchup\par
lemon\par
*LIME, juice\par
Malaysian cuisine\par
mangoes\par
melon\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mustard, yellow\par
oil: canola, sesame\par
onions, red\par
orange\par
papaya\par
peanuts, crushed\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
pumpkin seeds\par
radishes\par
salads (e.g., fruit)\par
salsa\par
salt, kosher\par
sesame oil\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
sugar\par
vinegar, white\par
I love the gentle, mellow tanginess kaffir lime leaf adds to curries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MEERU DHALWALA, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
jicama + avocado + grapefruit + pumpkin seeds\par
jicama + chili powder + lime juice\par
JUNIPER BERRIES\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Character: refreshing\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
allspice\par
Alsatian cuisine\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
cabbage\par
caraway\par
celery\par
chicken\par
choucroute\par
duck\par
fennel\par
fish\par
GAME\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
gin\par
goose\par
ham\par
kidneys\par
lamb\par
liver\par
marinades\par
marjoram\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pepper\par
pork\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salmon\par
sauces\par
sauerkraut\par
savory\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
stuffings, esp. bread\par
thyme\par
veal\par
VENISON\par
wine, red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
juniper berries + game + garlic + rosemary\par
KAFFIR LIMES AND KAFFIR LIME LEAF (See also Lemons,\par
Limes, etc.)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: stir-fry\par
basil, Thai\par
beef\par
cardamom\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curry pastes and curries\par
fish\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
marinades\par
mushrooms\par
noodles\par
pork\par
poultry\par
rice\par
salads\par
sesame\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. Thai\par
star anise\par
sugar\par
tamarind\par
THAI CUISINE\par
turmeric\par
vegetables, esp. green\par
Flavor Affinities\par
kaffir lime + saffron + seafood\par
kaffir lime leaf + duck + ginger\par
kaffir lime leaf + rice + turmeric\par
KALE\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower,\par
collard greens, kohlrabi\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: blanch, boil, braise, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, red\par
butter\par
cheese: cheddar, Parmesan\par
chicken, roasted\par
cream\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
meats, roasted\par
I like kale blanched then saut\'e9ed with some onions, a pinch of salt, and some\par
smoked sausage.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: grapeseed, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. yellow\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt, kosher\par
sausage, chorizo\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, red wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
kale + garlic + olive oil + red wine vinegar\par
kale + onions + salt + smoked sausage\par
KIWI FRUIT\par
Season: late autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
bananas\par
berries\par
cherries\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
coconut\par
cream and ice cream\par
crust: pastry or pie\par
custard\par
grapefruit\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime\par
lychee\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
oranges\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
pineapple\par
rum\par
salad, esp. chicken or fruit\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
wine: Champagne, ice wine\par
KOHLRABI (See also Rutabagas, Turnips)\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Botanical relatives: broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower,\par
collard greens, kale\par
Weight: medium (esp. when younger)\f2\endash\f1 heavy (esp. when older)\par
Volume: moderate (esp. when younger)\f2\endash\f1 loud (esp. when older)\par
Techniques: boil, steam, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
basil\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery leaves or seeds\par
celery root\par
cheese, esp. Parmesan, Swiss\par
chervil\par
cilantro\par
Kohlrabi is an underrated vegetable. I admit it has not always been one of my\par
favorites, but it has grown on me over the years. Now, I love it. I can\rquote t precisely\par
place its flavor, which is somewhere between a turnip, radish, and cauliflower.\par
But it tastes great and is really versatile. You can grill it, roast it, glaze it like a\par
carrot, or make a gratin out of it with potatoes. We have even grated it and made\par
a r\'e9moulade out of it like you would with a celery root. But the best way to\par
enjoy kohlrabi is grilled, roasted, and drizzled with olive oil and sea salt. That is\par
my favorite!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VITALY PALEY, PALEY\rquote S PLACE (PORTLAND, OREGON)\par
coriander\par
cream\par
dill\par
fennel leaves or seeds\par
garlic\par
horseradish\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lovage\par
mace\par
mustard (e.g., Dijon)\par
mustard seeds\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
salt, esp. sea\par
sesame oil, seeds\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
tamari\par
turmeric\par
vinegar, red wine\par
KOREAN CUISINE\par
chile peppers\par
fish\par
garlic\par
noodles, esp. buckwheat\par
rice\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
vegetables, pickled (e.g., kimchi)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + garlic + soy sauce\par
chile peppers + sesame seeds + soy sauce\par
chile peppers + soy sauce\par
garlic + sesame seeds + soy sauce\par
garlic + soy sauce\par
KUMQUATS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sour, bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: raw, stew\par
Asian cuisines\par
beef\par
berries: cranberries, strawberries\par
brandy\par
caramel\par
cayenne\par
chicken\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
chutney\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
coconut\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
custard\par
dates\par
duck\par
East Asian cuisine\par
endive (Belgian)\par
fish, esp. cod, halibut, red snapper, salmon, tuna, esp. grilled\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lime\par
mace\par
mango\par
marinades\par
meats\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions, spring\par
orange\par
papaya\par
pecans\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
pistachios\par
pomegranates\par
poppy seeds\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
rum\par
SALADS: FRUIT, GREEN\par
salt\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
wine, white\par
LAMB \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise (esp. shanks), grill (esp. leg), roast (esp. leg), stew (esp.\par
shoulder)\par
Tips: Cloves add richness to the flavor of lamb.\par
Our signature wine-marinated lamb popsicles in fenugreek cream curry on\par
spinach potatoes dish is bare rugged simplicity. You have rack of lamb that has\par
been cooked just a few minutes. Then you have a simple sauce that is essentially\par
just cream and garlic \f2\emdash\f1  and you can taste all three. We add some green\par
fenugreek that gives an earthiness to the dish and takes it to a whole new level. It\par
is incredibly simple. It is a dish about technique because if the garlic is cooked\par
too long, it gets bitter. Or if you add too much fenugreek, it gets bitter and\par
overpowers the cream. But in the right proportions, it is perfect.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MEERU DHALWALA, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
Dishes\par
Lamb, Fig, Pernod, and a Pillow of Sassafras Air \f2\emdash\f1  Grant Achatz, Alinea\par
(Chicago)\par
Lamb with Stew of Chickpeas, Root Vegetables, and Braised Lettuces \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dan Barber, Blue Hill at Stone Barns (Pocantico Hills, New York) Mint Love\par
Letters with Spicy Lamb Sausage \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Grilled Lamb Sirloin in a Roasted Garlic Sauce with Potato\f2\endash\f1 Celery Root\par
Gratin and Saut\'e9ed Escarole \f2\emdash\f1  Ann Cashion, Cashion\rquote s Eat Place\par
(Washington, DC)\par
Colorado Rack of Lamb with Roasted Fennel, Glazed Baby Carrots, Fresh\par
Garbanzo Beans, and Cardoon Puree, Ni\'e7oise Olive\f2\endash\f1 Kumquat Tapenade \f2\emdash\f1\par
Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Colorado Lamb Loin with Creamy Polenta, Morel Mushrooms, and Star\par
Route Fava Beans, Perigord Truffle Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San\par
Francisco)\par
Roast Lamb Sirloin on Crispy Goat Cheese Polenta with Saffron-Braised\par
Baby Vegetables and Minted Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Brad Farmerie, Public (New York\par
City)\par
\ldblquote Armenian Style\rdblquote  Lamb Skewers, Mediterranean Chickpea Salad,\par
\ldblquote Panisses,\rdblquote  and Minted Sheep\rquote s Milk Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha\par
(Chicago)\par
Poached Spring Lamb with Artichoke Tart and Pine Nut\f2\endash\f1 Morel Gremolata\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Bradley Ogden, at the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception Moroccan\par
Spiced Rack of Lamb with Couscous Salad, Roasted Eggplant, Lemon\f2\endash\f1\par
Black Pepper Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Pan-Roasted Lamb Rack and Eighteen-Hours-Braised Leg of Lamb; Goat\par
Cheese Mashed Potatoes; Wild Mushroom\f2\endash\f1 Red Wine Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert,\par
Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Lamb Black Truffle Tagliatelle with Preserved Lemon and Aged Parmesan\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Truffle and Almond-Crusted Rack of Lamb \f2\emdash\f1  Brad Thompson, Mary\par
Elaine\rquote s at the Phoenician (Scottsdale, Arizona) Wine-Marinated Lamb\par
Popsicles in Fenugreek Cream Curry on Spinach Potatoes \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and\par
Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
I work with a local lamb farmer in the Willamette Valley who has true spring\par
lamb in the spring. We have a spit and every Friday night we roast a whole lamb.\par
I am a big fan of lamb shoulder. It can take a beating and in the end come out\par
glorious tasting! There is an old French technique where they cook ham in hay.\par
The hay is submerged in water; then they put the ham on it to cook. It is\par
amazing. We adapted this technique to the lamb. We had our farmer collect the\par
hay and grass in the field where the lamb grazed with the thinking that this is\par
what the lamb actually ate. We then dry the hay by letting it sit out overnight on\par
a tray, so it becomes really butterscotchy and barnyardy. You can use any hay for\par
this technique but I\rquote m just a purist.\par
We brine a boneless shoulder of lamb for 24 hours in a brining solution of 1\par
cup of salt and 1\f2\u8260?\f1 4 cup of sugar in a gallon of water, [adding] some peppercorns,\par
bay leaf, a couple of cardamom pods, a cinnamon stick, and cumin. The brine is\par
brought to a boil, cooled down, and the lamb goes in. After the brining we rub\par
the lamb with garlic and summer savory and tie it up into a log and put it on the\par
bed of hay, drizzle it with white wine, cover it, and put it in the oven. It is nature\par
going back on itself. The lamb ate the hay, the hay makes the lamb taste better.\par
When it\rquote s cooked, the flavors are intense but pleasant and it becomes something\par
else. When lavender is in season, I\rquote ll throw some in the hay as well and it is\par
delicious.\par
With the lamb I like to serve a stuffed tomato Proven\'e7al [typically a\par
combination of basil, bread crumbs, garlic, olive oil]. You want to serve\par
something simple. You could also serve a crushed potato with savory and olive\par
oil or a medley of vegetables.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VITALY PALEY, PALEY\rquote S PLACE (PORTLAND, OREGON)\par
aioli\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: cranberry, fava, FLAGEOLETS, green, WHITE\par
beer\par
bell peppers\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
bulgur wheat\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
chard\par
cheese: blue, feta, Parmesan, ricotta\par
chickpeas\par
chiles: jalape\'f1o, red\par
chili powder\par
chives\par
chocolate, dark\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
dates\par
dill\par
Eastern Mediterranean (e.g., Greek, Turkish) cuisine\par
eggplant\par
endive\par
escarole\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek, esp. green\par
figs, dried black\par
five-spice powder\par
FLAGEOLETS\par
garam masala\par
*GARLIC and garlic paste\par
ginger\par
Greek cuisine\par
herbs\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Irish cuisine (e.g., stews)\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mace\par
marjoram\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
*MINT, esp. spearmint, mint jelly\par
mirepoix\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
MUSTARD, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. black, kalamata, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS: pearl, red, white, yellow\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
pasta, esp. pappardelle\par
peas, esp. sweet\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
polenta\par
pomegranates and pomegranate molasses\par
porcini mushrooms\par
potatoes, esp. new or red\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice: basmati, white, wild\par
risotto\par
*ROSEMARY\par
rutabaga\par
saffron\par
sage, fresh\par
SALT:fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
savory\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sherry, oloroso\par
spinach\par
stocks: beef, chicken, lamb, veal\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tabbouleh\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
THYME, FRESH\par
TOMATOES and tomato sauces\par
truffles, black, and truffle oil\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, root\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine, rice wine, sherry, white\par
watercress\par
WINE: dry white, red (e.g., Petite Syrah)\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lamb + broccoli rabe + Parmesan cheese\par
lamb + cardamom + yogurt\par
lamb + carrots + ginger + pistachios\par
lamb + carrots + lentils + parsley\par
lamb + chickpeas + garlic\par
lamb + chocolate + cinnamon + cloves\par
lamb + cilantro + dill + garlic + mint\par
lamb + cinnamon + dried apricots + preserved lemons + walnuts\par
lamb + cinnamon + garlic + lemon + mint + onion + oregano\par
lamb + cinnamon + prunes\par
lamb + clove + red wine\par
lamb + cream + fenugreek + garlic\par
lamb + cucumber + mint + tomatoes\par
lamb + escarole + lemon\par
lamb + fava beans + thyme\par
lamb + fennel + onions + turnips\par
lamb + flageolet beans + thyme\par
lamb + garlic + flageolet beans\par
lamb + garlic + olives\par
lamb + garlic + rosemary\par
lamb + mint + mustard\par
lamb + mint + olives\par
lamb + mint + parsley\par
lamb + mint + peas + risotto\par
lamb + mint + ricotta cheese\par
lamb + mint + tomatoes\par
LAMB, CHOPS\par
Techniques: broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
anchovies\par
beans (e.g., fava)\par
bell peppers, red\par
broccoli, rabe\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chard\par
cheese, feta\par
cilantro\par
cumin\par
curry\par
fennel\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
lime\par
mace\par
mint\par
miso\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
oil: canola, peanut\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
onions, esp. pearl\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
pomegranates\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
salad\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
savory\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles\par
vinegar: balsamic, malt\par
wine, dry red\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lamb chop + lemon + mint\par
LATIN AMERICAN CUISINE\par
beans, black\par
beef\par
caf\'e9 con leche\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
corn\par
cumin\par
fruits\par
garlic\par
greens\par
lime, juice\par
meats\par
Latin American cuisine is very Mediterranean. It\rquote s based on what was brought\par
over from Spain and Italy. You\rquote ll see the combination of garlic, onions, and\par
peppers like you\rquote ll see in Spain and Italy, not to mention the same pantry of\par
herbs and spices: cilantro, cinnamon, cloves, cumin, oregano, rosemary, thyme.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARICEL PRESILLA, ZAFRA (HOBOKEN, NEW JERSEY)\par
mixed grilled meats\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
peppers\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sausages\par
seafood\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vegetables\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beef + corn + sweet potatoes\par
garlic + onions + peppers\par
meats + black beans + greens + orange + rice\par
seafood + chile peppers + cilantro + garlic + lime\par
LAVENDER\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Caraway seeds can substitute for lavender.\par
almonds\par
apples\par
baked goods: cakes, cookies, scones, shortbread\par
berries\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
cheese, ricotta\par
cherries\par
CHICKEN\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants, black\par
custards\par
desserts\par
duck\par
figs\par
French cuisine\par
fruit and fruit preserves\par
game birds\par
ginger\par
herbes de Provence (occasional ingredient)\par
HONEY\par
LAMB\par
lemon\par
lemonade\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
meats (e.g., beef, lamb, steak)\par
milk\par
mint\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
peaches\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
Proven\'e7al cuisine\par
Lavender works with plums or peaches.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Lavender and rosemary work in butter cakes, cookies, and other baked goods.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
I like very little lavender with quail for its savory aroma, but the key phrase is\par
\ldblquote very little\rdblquote  \f2\emdash\f1  or else it\rquote s like eating a piece of soap!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Dishes\par
Salade de Poireaux Frais: Chilled Leeks with Fingerling Potatoes and\par
Piquillo Peppers \f2\emdash\f1  Thomas Keller, Bouchon (Yountville, California)\par
Leek and Asparagus Pasta with Lemon, Parmesan, and Poached Egg \f2\emdash\f1\par
Peter Nowakoski, Rat\rquote s (Hamilton, New Jersey)\par
quail\par
rabbit\par
ras el hanout (key ingredient)\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
savory\par
spearmint\par
stews\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
tea, esp. black\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lavender + cream + sugar\par
lavender + meat + salt\par
LEEKS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Botanical relatives: chives, garlic, onions, shallots\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: boil, braise, fry, grill, roast, steam\par
Tips: Add early in cooking process.\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
barley\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bouillabaisse\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
caraway\par
carrot\par
cauliflower\par
celery\par
cheese: cheddar, goat, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
eggs (including hard-boiled) and egg dishes\par
fennel\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
Greek cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lovage\par
meats, white\par
mushrooms, esp. oyster\par
mussels\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
oil: corn, grapeseed, hazelnut, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
sage\par
salads\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces, romesco\par
scallions\par
sea bass\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tamari\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
truffles, black\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine: dry white, red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
leeks + anchovies + garlic + olive oil\par
leeks + bacon + cream\par
leeks + cream + thyme\par
leeks + mustard + vinaigrette\par
LEGUMES (See Beans, Lentils, Peas, etc.)\par
LEMONS\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
almonds\par
anise\par
We have lemon juice right next to the salt when we cook. Acid is the most\par
important aspect of how a dish tastes \f2\emdash\f1  whether it is there as subtle punctuation\par
or an exclamation point!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Lemon zest adds a totally different dynamic than lemon juice. If you are making\par
an apple crisp, if you added a teaspoon of zest it would taste very different than\par
if you added lemon juice. The juice would make it taste tart, whereas the zest\par
would actually add a lemon flavor component to it. For ice cream, custards, and\par
tarts, use lemon juice. But if you are going to combine lemon with other flavors,\par
that\rquote s when you use zest.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Use lemon juice when you want the acid and lemony flavor of the juice. If you\par
want the perfume of the lemon, use the zest because the skin is where you get\par
the essential oils. I use more lemon and orange than vanilla in my cooking\par
because they are more prevalent in Italy and in Italian cooking, and a flavor\par
profile that people recognize as Italian.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Lemon can be used by itself or with other ingredients because it enhances so\par
many flavors. An orange can be a little too mellow, but lemon makes flavors\par
much brighter. Lemon is an underlying flavor as much as the star. If there is one\par
fruit you had to always have on hand as a basic staple, it is lemon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
apples\par
apricots\par
artichokes\par
bananas\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
berries\par
beverages\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
capers\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
Dishes\par
Ricotta-Lemon Pancakes with Blackberries and Honeycomb Butter \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
cayenne\par
cheese: goat, ricotta\par
cherries\par
chervil\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chives\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
crab\par
cranberries\par
cream / milk\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
figs: fresh, dried\par
FISH\par
GARLIC\par
gin\par
ginger\par
gooseberries\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY\par
kiwi fruit\par
lamb\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lime\par
liqueurs: nut, orange (e.g., Cointreau, cura\'e7ao, Grand Marnier)\par
mango\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
Mediterranean cuisines\par
Middle Eastern cuisines\par
mint (garnish)\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nectarines\par
nuts, esp. hazelnuts\par
oats\par
olive oil\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
oysters\par
papaya\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
persimmons\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
poppy seeds\par
pork and pork chops\par
poultry\par
prunes\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces: brown butter, parsley\par
sesame oil\par
shallots\par
SHELLFISH\par
sour cream\par
stock, chicken\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
tangerine\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
violets\par
vodka\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, sweet (e.g., Muscat), white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lemon + berries + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
lemon + blackberries + honey + ricotta cheese\par
LEMONS, MEYER\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
cream\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime\par
orange\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
LEMONS, PRESERVED\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
lamb\par
MOROCCAN CUISINE\par
nigella seeds\par
saffron\par
We churn through preserved lemons! In the middle of the summer, we buy\par
cases so that we can age them eight months before we use them. After six\par
months, they are great. After eight months or a year, you see God. They become\par
incredible just by waiting those extra few months. I make preserved lemons by\par
feel. I primarily use salt and will add some cinnamon, clove, nigella, a tiny, tiny\par
bit of saffron, and then just tuck them away in the refrigerator. If I wasn\rquote t so\par
greedy, I would give them away, but we are talking a year of my life here!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
When you are using different kinds of lemons, you need to treat them as\par
different things. A Meyer lemon is different from a regular lemon. If you are\par
using a Meyer lemon, you may want the perfume, aroma, and subtlety of it. Yet\par
when you taste it, you may want to add a touch of regular lemon to give it a little\par
more acidity and a little kick.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
We get a lot of Meyer lemons in during the season, and they have a lovely\par
sweet-orangey lemon flavor. But there are times that they are simply too sweet\par
and we have to either add regular lemon or some lime to balance the Meyer\par
lemon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
Dishes\par
Meyer Lemon Cream Pie with Roasted Strawberries, Candied Coconut,\par
Vanilla Chantilly \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
LEMON BALM\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
apricots\par
asparagus\par
berries\par
carrots\par
chicken\par
chives\par
dill\par
fennel bulb\par
fish\par
fruit\par
ginger\par
melon\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peaches\par
peas\par
salads, esp. fruit and green\par
teas\par
LEMON BASIL\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
apricots\par
berries\par
cinnamon\par
desserts\par
fish\par
peaches\par
seafood\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
vegetables\par
LEMONGRASS\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add near end of cooking process; use in stir-fries.\par
basil\par
beef\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: red, green\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cream\par
curries\par
FISH\par
fruits\par
galangal\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
Malaysian cuisine\par
meats\par
mint\par
noodles, rice\par
offal\par
onions\par
parsley\par
peanuts\par
pork\par
poultry\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
SHELLFISH\par
shrimp\par
soups, esp. chicken or turkey\par
Southeast Asian cuisines\par
spring rolls\par
stews\par
teas\par
THAI CUISINE\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
vegetables\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinaigrettes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lemongrass + chives + mint\par
lemongrass + cilantro + mint\par
lemongrass + cream + vanilla\par
LEMON THYME\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
beverages (e.g., herbal teas)\par
bouillabaisse\par
carrots\par
chicken, esp. roasted\par
chives\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fish\par
fruits\par
ginger\par
halibut\par
lamb\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
mint\par
orange\par
parsley\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salads: fruit, green\par
seafood\par
shellfish\par
sole\par
spinach\par
stews\par
Lemon verbena is amazing. I love to make a lemon verbena syrup and then\par
poach apricots in it. It is so refreshing! We also make our own soda here, and\par
lemon verbena is great in soda.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, JEAN GEORGES (NEW YORK CITY)\par
stocks and broths: fish, seafood\par
stuffings\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. spring\par
LEMON VERBENA\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
anise hyssop\par
apricots\par
baked goods (e.g., cakes, shortbread)\par
basil\par
beets\par
berries\par
beverages\par
blueberries\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cream and ice cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants, red\par
custards\par
desserts\par
fish\par
fruits\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapes\par
honey\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
lemon, juice\par
lemonade\par
lemongrass\par
lemon thyme\par
lime, juice\par
melon\par
milk\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
nectarines\par
peaches\par
peas\par
plums\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
salads, fruit and green\par
salt\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
tamarind\par
tea, green\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lemon verbena + apricots + sugar\par
LENTILS\par
Season: winter\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 stringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer\par
Tips: Green lentils are more flavorful than brown or red.\par
apples: cider, juice\par
bacon\par
BAY LEAF\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bouquet garni\par
bread and croutons\par
butter, unsalted\par
cardamom\par
CARROTS\par
cayenne\par
CELERY\par
celery root\par
cheese, goat\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chives (garnish)\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
Dishes\par
Green Lentil Soup with Black Truffle, Smoked Quail, Crispy Shallots \f2\emdash\f1\par
Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Lentil Stew with Blood Sausage, Chorizo, or Ham with a Poached Egg on\par
Top \f2\emdash\f1  Alexandra Raij, T\'eda Pol (New York City)\par
A drizzle of sherry vinegar just before you serve lentils elevates them to another\par
level.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I like lentils for soup with a smoked ham hock. For seasoning the soup, I\par
recommend thyme, bay leaf, and a pinch of cumin. You can add bacon or\par
sausage, or serve it with potato galettes on the side.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, The Modern (New York City)\par
cornichons\par
cream\par
cumin, esp. seeds\par
curry: leaves, powder, sauces\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
French cuisine\par
game birds, roasted (e.g., quail)\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
ham and ham hocks\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mirepoix (esp. for soups)\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard seeds, black\par
OIL: hazelnut, peanut, vegetable, walnut\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, esp. red, white, yellow\par
oregano\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
poultry, roasted (e.g., chicken)\par
prosciutto\par
SALMON\par
SALT: kosher\par
sausage, esp. smoked\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sorrel, esp. with green lentils\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squash, winter (e.g., butternut)\par
STOCKS: chicken, vegetable\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine, red\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lentils + bacon + bell pepper + cumin + garlic\par
lentils + bacon + garlic + sherry vinegar\par
lentils + bay leaf + onions + thyme\par
lentils + cumin + turmeric\par
lentils + olive oil + parsley + sorrel\par
LETTUCES \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bread, breadsticks, croutons, etc.\par
capers\par
cheese (e.g., feta)\par
chicories, aka bitter greens\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
fennel leaves\par
garlic\par
lemon, juice\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nuts\par
oil: hazelnut, peanut, walnut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
orange\par
parsley\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
raisins\par
salt\par
shallots\par
sprouts\par
tarragon\par
vegetables, esp. raw\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider, red wine\par
watercress\par
LETTUCE, BIBB (aka Boston or butter lettuce)\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
arugula\par
avocados\par
basil\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cucumbers\par
fines herbes\par
lemon\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
radishes\par
salt\par
sesame seeds\par
Bibb lettuce is a light, delicate, and almost creamy lettuce, so I serve it with a\par
creamy dressing to mimic that creaminess. Because of its delicacy, to make the\par
mayonnaise I\rquote ll use a neutral oil that\rquote s a blend of 80 percent canola and 20\par
percent olive. It finds a counterpoint in lemon and fines herbes, and gets a note\par
of freshness, crunch, and spicy heat from radishes.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
shallots\par
tarragon\par
vinaigrette\par
watercress\par
yogurt\par
LETTUCES \f2\emdash\f1  BITTER GREENS AND CHICORIES (See\par
Arugula, Escarole, Fris\'e9e, Radicchio)\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: medium\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beans, esp. \ldblquote fresh shell\rdblquote\par
butter\par
cheese: Asiago, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
garlic\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon balm\par
nuts\par
olives\par
olive oil\par
onions, yellow\par
pancetta\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
red pepper flakes\par
rices\par
salt, kosher\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine, white\par
walnuts\par
LETTUCES \f2\emdash\f1  MESCLUN GREENS (i.e., mixed baby lettuces)\par
(See also Lettuces \f2\emdash\f1  Bitter Greens and Chicories)\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Dishes\par
Hearts of Romaine and Treviso Radicchio with Spanish Serrano Ham,\par
Manchego Cheese, White Anchovies, Fire-Roasted Peppers, and Crisp\par
Capers \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Caesar Salad Soup\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Nobiyuki Sugie, Asiate (New York City)\par
Leaves of Romaine, Creamy Garlic Dressing, Red Onions, Capers, and\par
Parmesan \f2\emdash\f1  Cory Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
basil\par
cheese, goat\par
chervil\par
chives\par
confit (e.g., duck)\par
French cuisine\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon, juice\par
mushrooms, wild (e.g., morels)\par
olive oil\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pecan\par
pepper, black\par
salt\par
shallots\par
tarragon\par
vinaigrettes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mesclun greens + goat cheese + hazelnuts\par
LETTUCE, ROMAINE\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
anchovies\par
avocados\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
butter\par
Caesar salad\par
capers\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: feta, dry Jack, Monterey Jack, Parmesan, Stilton\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
croutons\par
cucumbers\par
eggs, yolk\par
GARLIC\par
grapefruit\par
ham\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lime: juice, zest\par
lovage\par
mayonnaise\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, kalamata\par
onions, esp. red\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, raspberry, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
Flavor Affinities\par
romaine + anchovies + Parmesan cheese\par
romaine + capers + garlic + Parmesan cheese + red onions\par
LIMES\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
apricots\par
avocados\par
berries: blueberries, gooseberries, raspberries, strawberries\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
capers\par
caramel\par
ceviche\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. jalape\'f1o or serrano\par
chocolate, white\par
cilantro\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dates\par
duck\par
figs, dried\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
fruits, esp. tropical\par
gin\par
ginger\par
gooseberries\par
grapefruit\par
green tea\par
guacamole\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
honey: raw, burnt\par
Acidity awakens flavors. I love lime, and just a squeeze of lime on seafood soup\par
or Thai soup awakens it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Key Lime Cheesecake with Macadamia Nut Crust, Lime Caramel, Key\par
Lime Curd \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Grilled Lime Pound Cake with Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche\f2\endash\f1 Tapioca Pudding, Blueberry\par
Gel\'e9e, and Burnt Honey Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Celina Tio, American Restaurant\par
(Kansas City)\par
jicama\par
kiwi fruit\par
Latin American cuisine\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lime: juice, zest\par
lobster\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
margaritas\par
mascarpone\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
melon, esp. honeydew\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint\par
orange, juice\par
papayas\par
passion fruit\par
peanuts\par
pecans\par
pie, esp. with Key limes\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
salt\par
scallops\par
sea bass\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
Southwestern cuisine\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tequila\par
Thai cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
vanilla\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vodka\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lime + blueberries + burnt honey + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
lime + caramel + cream cheese + macadamia nuts\par
lime + strawberries + tequila\par
LIMES AND LIME LEAF, KAFFIR (See Kaffir Limes and Kaffir\par
Lime Leaf)\par
LIVER, CALF\rquote S\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, saut\'e9\par
Tips: Cook briefly, one minute per side.\par
apples\par
arugula\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
bouquet garni\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cream\par
figs\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
jasmine\par
lemon, juice\par
milk\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
olives, green\par
ONIONS: fried, red, Vidalia, white\par
orange, zest\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pears\par
pepper: black, white\par
polenta\par
potatoes, mashed\par
prunes\par
rhubarb\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sauce, brown butter\par
sausages\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turnips\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, red wine, sherry\par
wine: dry red or white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
calf\rquote s liver + arugula + onions + pancetta\par
calf\rquote s liver + figs + onions + red wine vinegar\par
LIVER, CHICKEN\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: grill, saut\'e9\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
chicken fat\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
garlic\par
kale\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS: fried, red, sweet (e.g., Vidalia)\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts\par
pepper: black, white\par
radishes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry (e.g., fino)\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
vinegar: balsamic, sherry\par
wine, dry red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chicken livers + apples + sage\par
chicken livers + bacon + balsamic vinegar + onions + rosemary\par
chicken livers + kale + lemon\par
LIVER, DUCK OR GOOSE (See Foie Gras)\par
LOBSTER\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Techniques: bake, boil, broil, grill, pan roast, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: green, flageolets, white\par
beets\par
bell peppers, esp. red, yellow, and/or roasted\par
brandy\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
cabbage, esp. savoy\par
capers\par
carrots\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
Champagne\par
cheese: Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chili paste\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
clams\par
clove\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
crab\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry: paste (red), powder\par
curry leaf\par
daikon\par
dill\par
eggs and egg yolks\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek seeds\par
figs\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
foie gras\par
fris\'e9e\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
guacamole\par
haricots verts\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon, Meyer\par
I love lobster: poached, roasted, or grilled. I like mayonnaise or a vinaigrette\par
with my lobster much more than butter with lobster. In the summertime, I like it\par
with small potatoes and corn. I really like it with cilantro.\par
For my dish Roasted Maine Lobster in \ldblquote Folly of Herbs\rdblquote  with Baby Fennel and\par
Salsify, I wanted to do something different with lobster besides a lobster sauce. I\par
make a \ldblquote tea\rdblquote  of dried herbs: thyme, rosemary, fennel seeds, oregano, sage, mint,\par
and tarragon. This is boiled and strained, then gets a dash of Ricard [also known\par
as Pernod, an anise-flavored liquor]. The lobster gets finished with fresh parsley,\par
mint, and fresh oregano. I chose these two vegetables because salsify is\par
underused and underappreciated. I don\rquote t blanch my salsify in water because\par
when you do, the flavor stays in the water. I roast them and caramelize them a\par
little bit, then deglaze with just a little water with a sprig of thyme and a bay\par
leaf. Baby fennel is good because it plays off the Ricard and fennel. I quickly\par
blanch the fennel and then caramelize it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Cooked lobster meat blends well with mayonnaise, but I don\rquote t think I\rquote d use it\par
with raw lobster \f2\emdash\f1  I\rquote d use soy sauce instead.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KAZ OKOCHI, KAZ SUSHI BISTRO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Spaghettini with Spicy Budding Chives, Sweet Garlic, and a One-Pound\par
Lobster \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Chatham Bay Day Boat Lobster with Red Wine Sauce and ParsnipRosemary-Apple Puree \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley, Upstairs (New York City)\par
Chilled Maine Lobster: Mango, Fresh Artichoke, and Serrano Ham with a\par
Passion Fruit and Fresh Coconut Tamarind Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  David Bouley,\par
Bouley (New York City)\par
Potato Gnocchi with Maine Lobster, Wild Asparagus, Meyer Lemon, and\par
Tarragon \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e9re (San Francisco)\par
Lobster and Morel Ravioli in Basil Broth, Hazelnuts, and Lobster Oil \f2\emdash\f1\par
Sandy D\rquote Amato, Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
Nova Scotia Lobster Poached with Florence Fennel and Chamomile \f2\emdash\f1\par
Daniel Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Warm Lobster Salad, Cauliflower and Watercress Coulis \f2\emdash\f1  Jean Joho,\par
Everest (Chicago)\par
Butter-Poached Lobster with Sweet Carrot Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Thomas Keller, The\par
French Laundry (Yountville, California) Briny Lobster with Wasabi Mayo\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Maine Lobster Tails Roasted with Fingerling Potatoes, Pea Greens, Whole\par
Garlic, and Fava Beans \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York\par
City)\par
Martini of Maine Lobster, Cucumber Salad, Belvedere Vodka, and White\par
Sturgeon Caviar \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Lobster Poached in a Lemon Miso Broth with Shiso and Hon Shimgeji\par
Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Baked Lobster; Braised Endives, with Enoki and Black Trumpet\par
Mushroom with Bourbon\f2\endash\f1 Black Pepper Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin\par
(New York City)\par
lemongrass\par
lentils\par
lime: leaf (kaffir), juice\par
lobster roe\par
macaroni and cheese\par
mace\par
m\'e2che\par
mangoes\par
mascarpone\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
miso, white\par
mushrooms: button, cepes, chanterelles, cremini, porcini, shiitake, white,\par
wild\par
mussels\par
mustard: dry, seeds\par
New England cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, hazelnut, peanut, sesame, vegetable, walnut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. pearl, red, Spanish\par
orange (juice, zest) and clementine\par
oyster sauce\par
papaya\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pasta (e.g., macaroni)\par
passion fruit\par
peanuts\par
peas\par
peas, snow\par
pepper: black, white\par
Pernod\par
pineapple\par
port\par
potatoes, esp. fingerling or new\par
pumpkin\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
rhubarb\par
rice, esp. sticky, and risotto\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
SALT: kosher, sea, sel gris\par
sauces, b\'e9chamel\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sea urchin\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
snow peas\par
Southern cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squid\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, fish, lobster, shellfish, veal, vegetable\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind, puree\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES: juice, paste, pulp\par
truffles: black, juice\par
vanilla\par
vermouth, dry\par
vinaigrette, esp. citrus\par
VINEGAR: red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
vodka\par
wasabi\par
water chestnuts\par
watermelon\par
whiskey\par
WINE: dry to off-dry white (e.g., Gew\'fcrztraminer or Riesling), dry red\par
(e.g., Syrah), port\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yuzu juice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lobster + artichokes + garlic\par
lobster + avocado + mayonnaise + tarragon + white wine vinegar\par
lobster + bacon + porcini mushrooms\par
lobster + basil + hazelnuts + morel mushrooms\par
lobster + basil + tomatoes\par
lobster + brandy + cream + rosemary\par
lobster + brown butter + orange + vanilla\par
lobster + butter + garlic + tarragon\par
lobster + celery + mayonnaise + black truffles\par
lobster + chanterelle mushrooms + parsley + Pernod\par
lobster + chanterelle mushrooms + tarragon\par
lobster + chive + lemon\par
lobster + cilantro + cumin\par
lobster + corn + garlic + lemon + potatoes + tarragon\par
lobster + fennel + lemon\par
lobster + mango + spinach\par
lobster + mayonnaise + wasabi\par
lobster + orange + soy sauce\par
lobster + pasta + peas\par
lobster + saffron + vanilla\par
LOTUS ROOT\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: fry, raw, simmer, stir-fry\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
lime\par
oil, vegetable\par
salads\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
stir-fried dishes\par
tempura\par
vinegar, rice\par
wine, rice\par
LOVAGE\par
Season: spring, autumn\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium, soft-leaved\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Always use fresh, not cooked.\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
beans, green\par
bell peppers\par
caraway\par
carrots\par
chard\par
cheese\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
clams\par
corn\par
crab, Dungeness\par
cream cheese\par
dill\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
fennel\par
fish, e.g., halibut, skate, smoked, tuna\par
garlic\par
greens\par
ham\par
juniper berries\par
lamb\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
mustard\par
nettles, stinging\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
Stinging nettles and lovage is a wonderful combination. Stinging nettles are\par
peppery with a green flavor and lovage is celery-like. It\rquote s funny: I find nettles\par
without lovage are kind of flat tasting. I will use this combination in a ravioli\par
filling or with local Dungeness crab as a sauce for a souffl\'e9.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
rabbit\par
rice\par
salads, green\par
sauces\par
shellfish\par
sorrel\par
soups, esp. fish\par
spinach\par
stews\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato juice\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lovage + Dungeness crab + stinging nettles\par
lovage + salmon + tomatoes\par
LUXURIOUS\par
caviar, esp. Beluga\par
Champagne\par
foie gras\par
Ib\'e9rico ham\par
Kobe beef\par
saffron\par
smoked fish\par
vanilla\par
truffles: black, white\par
wine\par
LYCHEES\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
anise hyssop\par
berries\par
blackberries\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
curry\par
duck\par
foie gras\par
ginger\par
honey\par
kiwi fruit\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
mangoes\par
melon, esp. honeydew\par
nuts\par
orange, tangerine\par
passion fruit\par
pears\par
pineapple\par
plums\par
pork\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
rose (French cuisine)\par
rum\par
sake\par
salads, fruit\par
shellfish: scallops, shrimp\par
strawberries\par
sugar, esp. palm\par
vodka\par
wine: plum, sparkling\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
lychees + ginger + lime\par
lychees + raspberries + rose\par
MACADAMIA NUT OIL (See Oil, Macadamia Nut)\par
MACADAMIA NUTS\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
beets\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
chicken\par
chocolate, esp. dark or white\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
crab\par
cream\par
dates\par
desserts\par
figs, dried\par
Dishes\par
Summer Raspberry-Lychee Macaroon with Lemon Sorbet \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Bertoia,\par
Cafe Boulud (New York City)\par
Our macadamia nut tart, which we serve with banana-rum ice cream, is our\par
take on pecan pie.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  LISSA DOUMANI, TERRA (ST. HELENA, CALIFORNIA)\par
Macadamia nuts are buttery, rich nuts. I will even pair them with sea scallops,\par
which also have a richness to them. The macadamia nuts don\rquote t overwhelm the\par
scallops and I put them in the dish slightly chopped \f2\emdash\f1  otherwise, the texture of\par
the nut would be too chewy. We use macadamia nuts on one of the simplest yet\par
most popular dishes on our menu \f2\emdash\f1  our jumbo lump crab cake with grilled\par
asparagus and toasted macadamia nuts. Our crab cake is the only recipe we\par
won\rquote t give out. It contains no herbs or spices. The only thing that goes in our\par
crab cake is crab, salt, pepper, panko [Japanese bread crumbs], and a little\par
mayonnaise to hold them together. You are the first people to get this recipe!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
fish (e.g., cod, halibut, mahi mahi)\par
ginger\par
goat cheese\par
grapefruit\par
guava\par
Hawaiian cuisine\par
honey\par
kumquats\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
lime\par
mango\par
maple syrup\par
mint\par
orange\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
pineapple\par
prunes\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
scallops\par
sugar, brown\par
vanilla\par
Flavor Affinities\par
macadamia nuts + bananas + caramel + cream\par
macadamia nuts + beets + goat cheese\par
macadamia nuts + coconut + lime\par
MACE\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: pungent, sweet\par
Botanical relatives: nutmeg\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
allspice\par
Asian cuisine\par
baked goods (e.g., doughnuts)\par
beans\par
broccoli\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cheese and cheese dishes, esp. creamy\par
cherry pie\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
chowders (e.g., fish)\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cream / milk\par
cumin\par
curry (ingredient)\par
eggs\par
English cuisine\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
garam masala (ingredient)\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
Indian cuisine\par
ketchup (ingredient)\par
lamb\par
meats\par
New England cuisine\par
NUTMEG\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pastries\par
pepper\par
potatoes\par
pound cake\par
puddings\par
pumpkin\par
salads, fruit\par
sauces: b\'e9chamel, cream, onion\par
sausages\par
shellfish, shrimp\par
soups and consomm\'e9s\par
spinach\par
stuffing\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
West Indian cuisine\par
If you go to Japan, you\rquote ll find that virtually all the sushi restaurants put a little\par
ginger and scallion on their mackerel sushi. It cuts its \ldblquote fishiness\rdblquote  while adding\par
flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KAZ OKOCHI, KAZ SUSHI BISTRO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
M\'e2CHE\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Weight: very light\par
Volume: very quiet\par
Techniques: raw, steam\par
apples\par
bacon\par
beets\par
butter\par
cheese, goat\par
cream\par
eggs, quail\par
endive\par
lemon, juice\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nuts: pistachios, walnuts\par
oil: grapeseed, nut\par
olive oil\par
orange\par
pomegranates\par
potatoes\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
vinegar: champagne, sherry\par
Flavor Affinities\par
m\'e2che + apples + bacon\par
m\'e2che + apples + bacon + vinegar\par
m\'e2che + apples + beets + endive + sherry vinaigrette + walnuts\par
m\'e2che + oranges + pistachios + pomegranates\par
MACKEREL\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, marinate, poach, saut\'e9, sear\par
apples\par
artichokes\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
bell peppers: red, yellow\par
butter\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
caviar\par
ceviche\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cornichons\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumber\par
cumin\par
dill\par
fennel\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
gooseberries\par
horseradish\par
LEMON, juice\par
lemon thyme\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mint (garnish)\par
miso\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard seeds\par
OIL: canola, corn, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PEPPER: black, green, white\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sake\par
salmon caviar\par
salt, sea\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
sorrel\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: chicken, fish\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
VINEGAR: champagne, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mackerel + arugula + chickpeas + lemon + rosemary\par
mackerel + chives + Dijon mustard + lemon juice + shallots + vinegar\par
mackerel + ginger + scallions\par
mackerel + onions + thyme\par
MAHI MAHI\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
avocado\par
cabbage\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
dill\par
fruits, esp. tropical\par
gin\par
juniper berries\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pepper, white\par
salt, sea\par
sugar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mahi mahi + avocado + cabbage + cilantro\par
Dishes\par
Taco de Pescado \ldblquote Baja\rdblquote : Battered and Deep-Fried Mahi Mahi in Soft Corn\par
Tortillas with Cabbage and Avocado-Cilantro Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins,\par
Mijita (San Francisco)\par
MALT\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
bananas\par
caramel\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
coffee\par
cream and ice cream\par
nuts\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
Dishes\par
Naha Sundae of Vanilla Malt Ice Cream, Hickory Nut Waffle, Bananas, and\par
Bourbon-Pecan Syrup, Shortbread Cookies \f2\emdash\f1  Elizabeth Dahl, pastry chef,\par
Naha (Chicago)\par
Double-Malted Euphoria with Malted Chocolate, Vanilla Mousse, and\par
Marcona Almond Brittle \f2\emdash\f1  Celina Tio, American Restaurant (Kansas City)\par
I love malt. It has a sweetness, breadiness, and graininess to its flavor. It works\par
with the classics like chocolate, vanilla, and caramel.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Mango Mousse, Pineapple Souffl\'e9, Roasted Pineapple, Swiss Meringue \f2\emdash\f1\par
Fran\'e7ois Payard, Payard Patisserie and Bistro (New York City) Organic\par
Strawberry and Grapefruit Granitas, Mango \ldblquote Salad,\rdblquote  Mascarpone \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Mango, Pistachio, and Banana Strudel with Coconut-Curry Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Allen\par
Susser, at the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception Raspberry-Mango\par
Souffl\'e9 with Fresh Fruit and Bittersweet Chocolate Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Celina Tio,\par
American Restaurant (Kansas City)\par
MANGOES\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 late summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
almonds\par
amaretto\par
anise\par
avocados\par
BANANAS (compatible fruit)\par
basil\par
bell peppers, esp. red and green\par
beverages (e.g., cocktails, smoothies)\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
buttermilk\par
butterscotch\par
cabbage, green\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
cayenne\par
ceviche\par
Champagne\par
cheese, esp. mixed-milk cheeses (e.g., Robiola Rocchetta and Amarelo da\par
Beira Baixa)\par
CHILE PEPPERS, esp. jalape\'f1o, serrano, red, green\par
chocolate, white\par
chutneys\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
COCONUT AND COCONUT MILK\par
coffee\par
cream (e.g., heavy, whipped)\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
curry powder\par
custard\par
fish\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Kirsch\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
lemon, juice\par
LIME, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mascarpone\par
Mexican cuisine\par
milk (e.g., evaporated)\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
oil, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS: red, sweet\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
orange liqueur\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
pepper, white\par
pineapple\par
pork, esp. roasted\par
poultry: chicken, duck\par
prosciutto\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
RUM\par
sake\par
salads, fruit\par
salmon\par
salt\par
Sauternes\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish, shrimp\par
sorbet\par
squab\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: LIGHT BROWN, WHITE\par
Tabasco sauce\par
Thai cuisine\par
tuna, esp. grilled\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
violets\par
vodka\par
wine: Chardonnay, sweet (e.g., ice wine)\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
soy sauce\par
wasabi\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mango + almonds + lime\par
mango + basil + Champagne\par
mango + black pepper + lemon + mint + passion fruit\par
mango + coconut + rice\par
mango + ginger + mint + papaya\par
mango + salmon + sushi rice\par
Mangoes pair well with some of the mixed-milk cheeses such as Robiola\par
Rocchetta and Amarelo da Beira Baixa.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MAX MCCALMAN, ARTISANAL CHEESE CENTER (NEW YORK CITY)\par
MAPLE SYRUP\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots\par
bacon\par
baked goods, e.g., gingerbread\par
I typically use maple syrup with nuts, like in a pecan pie. I will replace the dark\par
corn syrup in the recipe with maple syrup instead. It is always important to use a\par
very good quality [e.g., Vermont or Canadian] maple syrup. If you are working\par
with syrup and sugar, you need to be careful because the combination of dark\par
brown sugar with maple syrup can become very intense.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
BLiS maple syrup is aged in bourbon barrels, and is good enough to drink on its\par
own! I\rquote ll use it with everything from duck breast to foie gras.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
Dishes\par
Maple and Anise French Toast with Lavender Custard \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and\par
Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Milk Chocolate and Maple Caramel Cake\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Milk Chocolate and Maple Caramel Ice Cream, Caramelized Bananas, and\par
Ginger Tuile \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
BANANAS\par
BLUEBERRIES\par
breakfast / brunch\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
Canadian cuisine\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate, esp. dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
coffee\par
corn syrup\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
figs, esp. dried\par
foie gras\par
French toast\par
fruit\par
ginger\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
ice cream: coffee, vanilla\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mascarpone\par
nectarines\par
New England cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oats\par
onions\par
orange\par
pancakes\par
peaches\par
PEARS\par
PECANS\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
plums\par
pork ribs\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rum: dark, light\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
sweet potatoes\par
sugar: light brown, raw, white\par
tea\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
waffles\par
WALNUTS\par
whiskey\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
sugar, dark brown, as it is too intense with maple syrup\par
Flavor Affinities\par
maple syrup + blueberries + lemon\par
maple syrup + butter + chocolate + cream\par
maple syrup + caramel + pecans\par
maple syrup + mascarpone + pistachios\par
MARJORAM\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet, spicy\par
Botanical relatives: oregano (which is stronger in flavor than marjoram)\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. green\par
beef\par
beets\par
bouquet garni (ingredient)\par
bread\par
butter\par
carrots\par
chard\par
cheese: fresh goat, mozzarella\par
chicken\par
chives\par
chowders\par
clams\par
corn\par
cucumber\par
delicate-flavored foods (e.g., those \ldblquote quiet\rdblquote  in Volume)\par
duck\par
eggs and egg dishes (e.g., omelets)\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
fines herbes (ingredient)\par
garlic\par
halibut\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lima beans\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms, esp. wild\par
North African cuisine\par
North American cuisine\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pasta, esp. macaroni or ravioli\par
peas\par
pizza\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
SALADS, esp. green, and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
sausages\par
savory\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. bean, onion\par
spinach\par
squash, summer\par
stews\par
stuffing\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
tuna\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. summer\par
vinaigrettes\par
wine, red\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
marjoram + chicken + lemon\par
marjoram + fresh goat cheese + prosciutto\par
marjoram + tomato sauce + zucchini\par
Mediterranean herbs marry well. Rosemary and marjoram, or thyme and\par
savory, are naturals together.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
MASCARPONE\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apricots\par
arugula\par
berries\par
biscotti\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
butter\par
caramel\par
cheese, ricotta\par
cherries\par
chives\par
chocolate, esp. dark\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee/espresso\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants, red\par
dates\par
figs\par
fruits, tropical\par
ginger\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
Kirsch\par
ladyfingers\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime\par
maple syrup\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oats\par
orange\par
pasta\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
prosciutto\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rum\par
strawberries\par
sugar: raw, white\par
truffle oil\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mascarpone + arugula + truffle oil\par
mascarpone + berries + figs\par
mascarpone + chocolate + strawberries\par
mascarpone + cinnamon + pumpkin\par
mascarpone + espresso + ladyfingers (cookies) + sugar\par
mascarpone + figs + prosciutto\par
mascarpone + maple syrup + pistachios\par
Dishes\par
Black Mission Figs with Mascarpone Foam and Prosciutto di Parma \f2\emdash\f1  Rick\par
Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
MEATS\par
Tips: Enhance the flavor of meat before (e.g., via brining and marinating),\par
during (e.g., via selecting the best cooking technique), and after cooking\par
(e.g., via condiments and sauces).\par
MEDITERRANEAN CUISINES (See also French [southern],\par
Italian, Middle Eastern, Moroccan, and Spanish Cuisines)\par
basil\par
citrus\par
garlic\par
herbs\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
olive oil\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
savory\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
marjoram + rosemary\par
savory + thyme\par
MELON/ MUSKMELONS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also\par
Cantaloupe, Honeydew, etc.)\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
almonds\par
anise seeds and anise hyssop\par
apricots\par
basil\par
beverages, esp. smoothies\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
Champagne\par
cherries\par
chile peppers, esp. serrano\par
chili powder\par
chili sauce\par
cilantro\par
cognac, esp. in cocktails\par
Cointreau\par
cream / milk\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cura\'e7ao, esp. in cocktails\par
cured meats (e.g., prosciutto, sopressata)\par
curry\par
fennel\par
ginger\par
Grand Marnier, esp. in cocktails\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ices and ice creams\par
Italian cuisine\par
Kirsch\par
kiwi fruit\par
LEMON, juice\par
lemon balm\par
LIME, juice\par
lychees\par
macadamia nuts\par
Madeira\par
mangoes\par
Midori liqueur\par
MINT, esp. spearmint\par
olive oil\par
orange\par
orange-flower water\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
port\par
PROSCIUTTO\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
sake\par
salads, esp. fruit\par
Tarragon works with muskmelons.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
salsas, fruit\par
salt, kosher\par
sambuca\par
soups, esp. chilled\par
strawberries: fruit, puree\par
tarragon\par
tequila, esp. in cocktails\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, rice\par
wines, sweet, esp. Gew\'fcrztraminer, late harvest wines, Muscat Beaumesde-Venise Riesling, Sauternes\par
yogurt\par
yuzu juice\par
MENU\par
Tips: Strive for balance over an entire menu, i.e., appetizer, entr\'e9e, and\par
dessert. Envision the course of a menu as a piece of music having a melody,\par
rhythm, and tempo.\par
When planning a menu, pick the dessert or the entr\'e9e first and have the other\par
one match it, in terms of style and preparation. If you are doing an entr\'e9e that\par
requires last-minute time in the kitchen, don\rquote t serve a dessert that requires lastminute time as well. If you have a main course that takes last-minute work, serve\par
a dessert that can be made a day ahead \f2\emdash\f1  or if your dessert is what needs lastminute attention, serve it after a stew or lasagna. When deciding what to make,\par
remember: The heavier the main course, the lighter the dessert should be, or vice\par
versa. I was recently going through some of my earlier books and was shocked\par
when I looked at the recipes. One recipe for a chocolate cake that we served at\par
Stars was served in big wedges. I was amazed we used to serve such a huge\par
portion! People can\rquote t eat like that anymore. At the same time, the cake is so good\par
I still want to serve it so I work backward. I will serve a chicken or something\par
else light for the main course, not a prime rib of beef.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Creating new dishes has to be more than simply intensifying flavors for dishes.\par
In terms of visual presentation, we are shifting into a new direction where the\par
food looks like one thing, but is really something else. That adds an extra\par
element of challenge for us. An example of this would be a [Mexican-inspired]\par
nacho dish we just created. You get something that looks like chips, sour cream,\par
salsa verde, and grated cheese. The cheese is actually grated from saffron ice\par
cream that we have thrown into liquid nitrogen, that is put into a food processor\par
grater. The salsa verde is made from kiwi, mint puree, and epozote to give it a\par
little twist. The sour cream is a yuzu cr\'e8me fra\'eeche. The chips are made from\par
pureed corn tortilla chips that have been sweetened with powdered sugar, then\par
pasted into triangles and deep fried. So you get something that looks like nachos,\par
but tastes completely different. So we are taking a visual aspect of something\par
you are comfortable with and serving it at the end of a twenty-course meal.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOMARO CANTU, Moto (Chicago)\par
MERLOT\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
beef\par
cheese, esp. blue and other full-flavored\par
chicken\par
duck\par
lamb\par
meat, red\par
mushrooms\par
pork\par
steak\par
turkey\par
veal\par
MEXICAN CUISINE\par
avocados\par
beans\par
beef\par
chicken\par
*CHILE PEPPERS\par
chili powder\par
chocolate\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
corn\par
cumin\par
epazote\par
fried dishes\par
garlic\par
lemon\par
lime, juice\par
nuts\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
pork\par
rice\par
saffron\par
salsas\par
scallions\par
seeds\par
squash\par
tomatoes\par
tortillas\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
wheat\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beans + rice\par
chile peppers + lime\par
chile peppers + tomatoes\par
cilantro + lime\par
MIDDLE EASTERN CUISINE\par
almonds\par
beans, fava\par
cheese, feta\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
fish\par
fruits, dried\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
goat\par
honey\par
lamb\par
lemons\par
lemons, preserved\par
lentils\par
meats, esp. roasted\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
pomegranates\par
poppy seeds\par
raisins\par
ras el hanout (spice blend)\par
rice\par
roasted dishes\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
sumac\par
tahini\par
tomatoes\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cilantro + cumin + ginger + red pepper\par
cinnamon + cloves + ginger + nutmeg\par
cinnamon + lemons + tomatoes\par
cinnamon + tomatoes\par
coriander + cumin + garlic\par
coriander + cumin + garlic + onions + parsley\par
coriander + cumin + garlic + pepper\par
eggplant + onions + tomatoes\par
garlic + coriander\par
garlic + lemon + mint\par
garlic + lemon + oregano\par
garlic + lemon + parsley\par
lemon + parsley\par
meat + cinnamon\par
salads + goat cheese + pomegranate seeds\par
yogurt + garlic + mint\par
yogurt + mint\par
yogurt + parsley\par
MINT \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Mint generally refers to spearmint.\par
Mint suggests \ldblquote false coolness\rdblquote  and adds a note of freshness to dishes.\par
Afghan cuisine\par
apples\par
Asian cuisines\par
asparagus\par
With mint, applemint is mild, while peppermint is strong.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
I was actually brought up in the school of thought that put a sprig of mint on\par
every dessert. I am not that guy anymore. I have a saying \f2\emdash\f1  \ldblquote NFG\rdblquote  \f2\emdash\f1  which\par
stands for two things at once: \ldblquote nonfunctional garnishes\rdblquote  are \ldblquote no fucking good.\rdblquote\par
If something doesn\rquote t make sense to the dish, it won\rquote t be there. I hate ordering\par
lamb and seeing a huge bunch of rosemary alongside it. Put it in the dish \f2\emdash\f1  let\par
me taste it!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, JEAN GEORGES (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love mint flavor, but some cooks started throwing mint on desserts just because\par
they liked the color of it. If you have a gorgeous strawberry shortcake and add\par
some mint to it, one of two things will happen: 1) Either you don\rquote t eat it, so\par
what\rquote s the point of putting it on the plate in the first place, or 2) If you do eat it,\par
that one mint leaf will completely change the balance of the dessert. If you have\par
a lemon tart that is mostly perfectly balanced lemon curd with a little whipped\par
cream and you add a mint leaf to the dessert, the leaf will play havoc with that\par
balance. So don\rquote t throw mint on a plate haphazardly, or you\rquote ll throw off the\par
balance of the entire dessert.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
The first place I think of with mint is Morocco. From there, it is the Middle\par
East. Mint and lamb is such a natural combination, as is mint and yogurt.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I don\rquote t use mint very much, but I have a serious thing for black peppermint! You\par
will see it in one form or another on my menu. I go to the farmers\rquote  market twice\par
a week and use it all summer. It is great with berries. It works best with\par
something light like an infusion or granita. Last summer, we made a tangy\par
lychee gel\'e9e that was served under oven-roasted Tristar strawberries tossed\par
lightly with balsamic vinegar. On top of the strawberries, we scooped the black\par
peppermint sorbet.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, Jean Georges (New York City)\par
basil\par
BEANS: black, fresh, white\par
beef\par
beets\par
bell peppers\par
berries\par
beverages\par
blackberries\par
bourbon\par
buttermilk\par
cardamom\par
carrots, esp. baby\par
cashews\par
Champagne\par
cheese: feta, ricotta\par
chicken\par
chile peppers (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chives\par
CHOCOLATE, ESP. DARK, white\par
chutneys\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
cocktails: mint julep (ingredient), Pimms No. 1 Cup (ingredient)\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
CUCUMBERS\par
cumin\par
curries\par
desserts\par
dill\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
Egyptian cuisine\par
endive\par
fenugreek\par
fish\par
FRUITS\par
fruits, tropical\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
halibut\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
jellies\par
kumquats\par
*LAMB\par
lavender\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils\par
lettuce\par
lime\par
mango\par
marinades\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
melon\par
Mexican cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
milk\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
nectarines\par
olives, black\par
onions, esp. red\par
orange\par
oregano (say some)\par
papaya\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
peaches, esp. cooked\par
pears\par
peas, esp. young\par
pepper\par
pineapple\par
plums, esp. cooked\par
pork\par
potatoes, esp. new\par
poultry\par
pumpkin\par
punches, fruit\par
radishes\par
raitas\par
raspberries\par
rice and rice dishes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
SALADS: bean, fruit, green, vegetable\par
salsas\par
sea bass\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
skate\par
soups, esp. bean, cold, and/or fish\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
spring rolls, esp. Vietnamese\par
squash, summer\par
stews, esp. seafood\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR\par
sumac\par
tabbouleh (key ingredient)\par
tea, esp. Earl Grey, green\par
Thai cuisine (e.g., green curries)\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
trout\par
tuna\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinegar: cider, rice wine\par
watermelon\par
YOGURT\par
zucchini\par
AVOID\par
oregano (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mint + chocolate + cream\par
mint + cilantro + dill\par
mint + cucumber + lime\par
mint + cucumber + vinegar\par
mint + cucumber + yogurt\par
mint + lamb + yogurt\par
MINT, DRIED\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
bold-flavored foods\par
cheese, feta\par
chicken\par
cucumbers\par
duck\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
garlic\par
Greek cuisine\par
hummus\par
kebabs\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
lentils\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, red\par
oregano\par
pasta\par
pork\par
rice\par
soups: chicken, vegetable\par
tomatoes\par
Turkish cuisine\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
MINT, PEPPERMINT\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: very loud\par
Tips: Mint suggests \ldblquote false coolness.\rdblquote\par
apples\par
berries\par
beverages\par
candies\par
carrots\par
chocolate\par
citrus\par
cream and ice cream\par
DESSERTS\par
iced desserts (e.g., granita, sorbet)\par
mangoes\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
milk\par
strawberries\par
teas\par
AVOID\par
savory foods\par
MIREPOIX\par
Tips: Use as the base of stocks and soups.\par
French cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
carrots + celery + onions\par
MISO AND MISO SOUP\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate (depending on light or dark miso)\par
Techniques: marinades, sauces, soups\par
beef\par
chicken\par
I like to add miso to purees because it adds a rich, buttery flavor and a rich\par
texture. I will serve broiled oysters topped with a puree of miso, pineapple, and\par
serrano chile. I am working on miso-avocado puree as well. It is delicious, but I\par
just haven\rquote t found the right dish for it yet. I am also working with misohuitlacoche soup with tofu, mushrooms, or corn.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I love miso. I went to a Japanese restaurant and loved the miso soup. I realized\par
that it would give more flavor than chicken broth to my onion soup. So now I\par
make a miso broth the night before, let it sit and separate, and use the broth for\par
my onion soup.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I will use several different misos, depending on the purpose. I might use saikyo,\par
a light, yellow, sweet miso, in marinades or with lighter fish like sweet shrimp\par
and scallops that would be overwhelmed by dark miso. Barley miso is a\par
distinctive strong, sweet miso that I\rquote ll use with nigiri with baby squid and shiso.\par
I\rquote ll use wheat miso with foie gras. Sometimes I\rquote ll even mix misos.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KAZ OKOCHI, KAZ SUSHI BISTRO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Roasted Duck Breast with a Red Wine\f2\endash\f1 Miso Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The\par
Modern (New York City)\par
Alaskan Black Cod with Chinese Broccoli, Homemade Tofu, Black Seaweed,\par
Asian Pear, Miso Broth \f2\emdash\f1  Christopher Lee, Gilt (New York City)\par
duck\par
fish: cod, salmon\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine\par
legumes\par
lemongrass\par
marinades\par
mirin\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
oysters\par
pineapple\par
rice, brown\par
sake\par
salad dressings\par
sauces\par
sesame oil\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
steak\par
stews\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
tofu\par
vinegar, rice\par
walnuts\par
MOLASSES\par
Taste: sweet, bitter\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
apples\par
baked goods (e.g., cookies, pies)\par
barbecue sauce\par
beans, baked\par
bread, esp. brown\par
butter, unsalted\par
cinnamon\par
cream\par
ginger\par
gingerbread\par
Grand Marnier\par
lemon, juice\par
marinades\par
New England cuisine (e.g., Indian pudding)\par
orange\par
pancakes\par
plums\par
popcorn\par
raspberries\par
sugar, brown\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
MONKFISH (See also Fish \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, stew\par
aioli\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
beer, wheat\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
cabbage: green, red, savoy\par
caperberries\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chard\par
chervil\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
chives\par
cider, hard\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
clams\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
Monkfish is great with garlic!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Line-Caught Monkfish Loin and \ldblquote Fresh Bacon\rdblquote  Kurobuta Pork Belly with\par
Golden Chanterelles, Wood-Grilled Leeks, and Herb-Crusted Salsifies,\par
Lobster Red Wine Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Saut\'e9ed Monkfish with Broccoli Rabe, Pine Nuts, and Raisins \f2\emdash\f1  David\par
Pasternak, Esca (New York City)\par
Roasted Monkfish with Spinach, Oyster Ravioli, Watercress Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
Michel Richard, Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
GARLIC\par
ginger, fresh\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lemongrass\par
lemon thyme\par
lobster\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mushrooms, esp. chanterelles, portobello\par
mussels\par
OIL: canola, corn, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. green\par
onions, esp. yellow\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
paprika, sweet\par
Parmesan cheese\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pesto\par
pepper: black, green, white\par
Pernod\par
pine nuts\par
pork: bacon, pork belly\par
potatoes, esp. new\par
red pepper flakes\par
romesco sauce\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salmon\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sausage\par
shallots\par
sherry, dry (e.g., fino)\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squid\par
star anise\par
STOCKS AND BROTHS: chicken, clam, fish, shellfish, veal\par
striped bass\par
Swiss chard\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, white wine\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
WINE: dry white (e.g., Gew\'fcrztraminer), or full-bodied red, dry sherry\par
Flavor Affinities\par
monkfish + aioli + new potatoes\par
monkfish + apples + sausage\par
monkfish + bacon + cabbage + potatoes\par
monkfish + basil + Swiss chard + thyme\par
monkfish + curry + mussels + saffron\par
monkfish + leeks + mussels\par
monkfish + red cabbage + pancetta\par
monkfish + white beans + fennel + garlic + saffron + tomatoes\par
MORELS (See Mushrooms, Morels)\par
MOROCCAN CUISINE\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bell peppers, green\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
couscous\par
coriander\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
dates\par
figs\par
fruits\par
ginger\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
LEMONS, PRESERVED\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pepper\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
raisins\par
ras el hanout\par
saffron\par
salads\par
stews, aka tagines\par
I don\rquote t know the first thing about Moroccan cooking other than eating\par
Moroccan food and owning Paula Wolfert\rquote s book [Couscous], but I serve a lamb\par
dish in Moroccan spices. I braise lamb shanks in cumin, saffron, and preserved\par
lemon, with the juice being turned into a sauce. The lamb shanks are then boned\par
and put into a cake with eggplant and molded onto a plate. This is not Moroccan\par
cooking per se, but it suggests the flavors of Morocco.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
sumac\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + garlic + olive oil + salt (aka harissa)\par
cinnamon + coriander + cumin\par
eggplant + cinnamon + mint\par
green tea + dried spearmint + sugar\par
lamb + cinnamon + honey + prunes\par
oranges + cinnamon + honey\par
parsley + lemon juice + olive oil\par
phyllo dough + almonds + cinnamon + honey\par
phyllo dough + honey + sesame seeds\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also specific mushrooms)\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, grill, pan roast, raw (e.g., in salads),\par
roast, saut\'e9, soup, steam, stew\par
almonds\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
barley\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: green, lima\par
beef\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
Dishes\par
Vegetarian Texas Chili: Ancho Chile Braise of Grilled Woodland\par
Mushrooms, White Runner Beans, Green Beans, Calabacitas, Cumin, and\par
Beer, topped with Mexican Queso Anejo and Red Onion \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless,\par
Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Wild Mushroom Soup with Ramps and Croutons \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud /\par
Bertrand Chemel, Caf\'e9 Boulud (New York City) Roasted Garlic Gnocchi with\par
Wild Mushrooms, Sage, and Crispy Sweetbreads \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The\par
Modern (New York City)\par
Warm Mushroom Salad: Fris\'e9e, Bacon, Goat Cheese, and Sherry\par
Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Mushroom Tart: Thin-Crust Tart Filled with Saut\'e9ed Wild Mushrooms,\par
Celeriac Puree, and Aged Port Reduction \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin (New\par
York City)\par
Risotto with Wild Rice, Squash, and Wild Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Judy Rodgers, Zuni\par
Caf\'e9 (San Francisco)\par
Warm Wild Mushroom Spinach Salad with Chickpeas, Olives, and\par
Preserved Lemon \f2\emdash\f1  Allen Susser, Chef Allen\rquote s (Miami)\par
Mushroom and Asparagus Risotto with Lemon Thyme \f2\emdash\f1  Jerry Traunfeld,\par
The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
celery\par
cheese: Comt\'e9, Emmental, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, Swiss\par
chervil\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
crab\par
CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
dill\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
fris\'e9e lettuce\par
game\par
garam masala\par
*GARLIC\par
garlic chives\par
ginger\par
grappa\par
ham\par
herbs\par
juniper berries\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
Madeira\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
milk\par
mirepoix\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, peanut, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions: green, pearl, red, yellow\par
oregano\par
paprika, esp. sweet\par
Parmesan cheese\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
rice\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
sake\par
SALT: fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
sesame oil\par
SHALLOTS\par
sherry, dry (e.g., manzanilla)\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, dashi, mushroom, veal\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes\par
truffle oil\par
veal\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic, red wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
WINE: dry red, white, vermouth\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mushrooms + garlic + lemon + olive oil\par
mushrooms + garlic + parsley\par
mushrooms + garlic + shallots\par
Marjoram brings up the mushroom flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Dishes\par
Pappardelle with Chanterelles and Thyme \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York\par
City)\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  CHANTERELLES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, saut\'e9\par
bay leaf\par
butter, unsalted\par
chard\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chives (garnish)\par
cream\par
eggs and egg dishes (e.g., omelets)\par
game\par
garlic\par
lentils\par
mussels\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. green\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
poultry\par
radicchio\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces\par
shallots\par
soups\par
STOCKS: BEEF, CHICKEN\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme, fresh\par
vinegar, sherry\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chanterelles + butter + cream + garlic + parsley\par
chanterelles + cream + garlic + thyme\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  CREMINI\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
arugula\par
butter\par
cheese: goat, Parmesan\par
chives\par
garlic\par
mascarpone\par
olive oil\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, white\par
salt\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme\par
truffle oil\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  MATSUTAKE\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: braise, fry, grill, saut\'e9, simmer, steam, stir-fry\par
butter\par
cabbage, savoy\par
chicken\par
cod, black\par
cream\par
custard\par
dashi\par
fish\par
herbs: chervil, chives, flat-leaf parsley, tarragon\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
mirin\par
mushrooms, wild\par
olive oil\par
pepper, black\par
rice\par
sake\par
salt\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
soup\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
tempura\par
tofu\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  MORELS\par
Season: spring (May\f2\endash\f1 June)\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques/Tips: Always serve cooked: boil, stew\par
ASPARAGUS: green, white\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
caraway seeds\par
cheese: Fontina, goat, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chicken mousse\par
chives\par
CREAM, heavy\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
eggs, yolks\par
faro\par
fava beans\par
Matsutake mushrooms have a cinnamon and pine quality to them. This is a fall\par
mushroom and works well with savoy cabbage. I like pairing luxurious\par
ingredients with cabbage. We will roast black cod and serve it with cabbage,\par
cream, and the matsutake.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Dishes\par
Organic Carnaroli Risotto with Wild Spring Morels, Wood-Grilled Ramps,\par
Confit of Green Garlic and Spinach, Parmigiano-Reggiano, and Umbrian\par
Olive Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Our Local Morel Pizza with Fontina Cheese, Virginia Country Ham, and\par
Frizzled Ramps. A Warm Salad of Grilled Asparagus and Freshwater Blue\par
Prawns with Sherry Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little\par
Washington (Washington, Virginia) Caraway seeds bring up the flavor in morel\par
mushrooms.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
fiddlehead ferns\par
GARLIC: regular, spring\par
ham: Virginia, Serrano\par
herbs\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
Madeira\par
marjoram\par
mirepoix\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. spring\par
pancetta\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pork\par
port\par
potatoes, esp. new\par
ramps\par
rosemary\par
SALT, kosher\par
sauces\par
savory\par
shallots\par
souffl\'e9s (e.g., goat cheese)\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: chicken, mushroom, vegetable\par
sweetbreads\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
truffles, black\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, sherry\par
wine, Champagne\par
Flavor Affinities\par
morels + asparagus + ramps\par
morels + garlic + lemon + olive oil + parsley\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  PORCINI CEPES KING BOLETE\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: grill, parboil, roast, saut\'e9, stew\par
almonds\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
cheese: Fontina, Garrotxa, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chicken, esp. roasted\par
chives\par
coffee\par
cream / milk\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fish: grilled, white\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
hazelnuts\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
Madeira\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
mint\par
mushrooms, button or cremini\par
OIL, PORCINI\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
Dishes\par
Raw Porcini with Arugula, Parmigiano, and Aceto Manadori \f2\emdash\f1  Mario\par
Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Salad of Porcini Mushrooms, Green Apple, and Garrotxa Cheese, with\par
Hazelnut Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
King Bolete \f2\emdash\f1  or porcini, as they are also known \f2\emdash\f1  are pretty sweet. I like\par
them with a carrot puree in ravioli. The sauce for the dish will be the braising\par
liquid from the ravioli as well as some carrot juice. The ravioli is then topped\par
with fried sage and black currants.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Dishes\par
Grilled Portobello with Manchego Cheese, Garlic, and Thyme Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Ann\par
Cashion, Cashion\rquote s Eat Place (Washington, DC)\par
Vegetarian Sushi: Sun-Dried Tomato and Portobello Roll \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi,\par
Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Gonzales Portobello Mushroom \ldblquote Steak,\rdblquote  Texas Brown Rice and Nut Cake,\par
Coconut-Chile Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Pasta Salad with Sun-Dried Tomato Pesto, Portobello Mushrooms, and\par
Grilled Squash \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter, Trotter\rquote s to Go (Chicago)\par
Portobello Mushrooms in Porcini Cream Curry \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru\par
Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
Portobello Mushroom and Red Bell Pepper Curry on Paneer with BeetDaikon Salad \f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
pepper, black\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
rice, arborio\par
sage\par
sake\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
steak\par
stocks: chicken, mushroom,\par
vegetable\par
tamari\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles, esp. white\par
veal\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
porcini + almonds + balsamic vinegar\par
porcini + arugula + lemon + Parmesan cheese\par
porcini + balsamic vinegar + radicchio\par
porcini + carrots + sage\par
porcini + coffee + veal\par
porcini + lemon juice + olive oil\par
porcini + parsley + tomatoes\par
porcini + prosciutto + spinach\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  PORTOBELLO\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9, stuff\par
Tips: Gets firmer with longer cooking.\par
cheese: manchego, Parmesan, ricotta\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
garlic\par
lemon\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
pasta\par
polenta\par
spinach\par
thyme\par
tomatoes, sun-dried\par
Flavor Affinities\par
portobello mushrooms + lemon + mint + olive oil\par
portobello mushrooms + polenta + spinach\par
MUSHROOMS \f2\emdash\f1  SHIITAKE\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: grill, saut\'e9, simmer, stir-fry\par
anchovies\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
brandy\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
cabbage, savoy\par
celery root\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cod\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
eggplant\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
fish sauce\par
GARLIC\par
Japanese cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime\par
mushrooms, oyster\par
OIL: canola, hazelnut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, esp. red, white\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
pizza\par
polenta\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rice, basmati\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
shallots\par
soups\par
sorrel\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stews\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
Vitaly Paley of Paley\rquote s Place in Portland, Oregon, on Cooking with\par
Mushrooms\par
Mushrooms Year-Round\par
Spring. This is the start of the morel season. One of the reasons I came to work\par
in Oregon was one day I was working in a kitchen in France and a box of morels\par
arrived with a tag on it that said \ldblquote Oregon.\rdblquote\par
Summer. The morels dwindle away, and we get a brief stint of porcini/cepes.\par
Late summer is golden and white chanterelle season.\par
Fall. The porcini come back and we also get in matsutake mushrooms as well.\par
We have [Pacific Northwest] black and white truffles here and the season starts\par
in November. They are pretty flavorful but it is important to realize they are\par
different from European truffles \f2\emdash\f1  not to mention a lot less expensive.\par
I\rquote m not a big fan of cultivated mushrooms but I do like a few. King oyster or\par
trumpet royal are the same mushroom and it is one of my favorites. Portobellos\par
are also good, though they are a little \lquote 70s.\par
I am suspicious of some dried mushrooms you find in the supermarket only\par
because you don\rquote t know how old they are and how much flavor they will have.\par
Buying and Cleaning Mushrooms\par
When it comes to mushrooms, every kind needs to be well cleaned because there\par
is nothing worse than getting a mouthful of grit. I wash them all by soaking them\par
in a bowl of water and pulling them out. The key to remember is that you want\par
to use mushrooms soon after washing them. Don\rquote t wash them a day ahead.\par
For morel mushrooms, you need to know how to cook them, and slicing them\par
up fresh and throwing them in a pan is not it. It is very important to clean them\par
and I recommend blanching them. Fill a pot with cold water, toss in a handful of\par
salt and then the mushrooms. Bring the pot to a boil, scoop out the mushrooms,\par
spread them out, and lightly squeeze them dry. As you dry them, take a good\par
look at them to make sure they are free of twigs and such.\par
Seasoning Mushrooms\par
When it comes to seasoning mushrooms, savory works across the board. The\par
seasoning combination that I\rquote ve used in my kitchen from day one is a raw\par
parsley and garlic combination that in French is called persillade. After the\par
mushrooms have been saut\'e9ed in butter or olive oil, at the last second you toss in\par
this combination with a pinch of salt. That is all a mushroom needs most of the\par
time!\par
If you are roasting porcini or king oyster mushrooms, roast them on a bed of\par
savory or thyme for extra flavor.\par
Flavor Affinities\par
shiitake mushrooms + basil + onions\par
MUSSELS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, grill, steam\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bass\par
bay leaf\par
beans: green, navy\par
bell peppers, esp. red and/or roasted\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery seeds\par
chanterelles\par
chervil\par
chile peppers, esp. jalape\'f1o\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
CLAMS and clam juice\par
cod\par
cognac\par
CREAM\par
curry powder\par
egg yolks\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
ham\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON, juice\par
lemon thyme\par
lovage\par
Dishes\par
Mussel Soup with Cilantro and Serrano Chile Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Robert Del Grande,\par
Caf\'e9 Annie (Houston)\par
Mussels in a Spicy Sauce of Panca Peppers, Garlic, Cilantro, and Peruvian\par
Dark Beer \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Our Version of the Classic Portuguese Surf and Turf Braise: Pork Belly,\par
Mussels, Potatoes, and Black Olives in a Savory Aj\'ed Panca and Dark Beer\par
Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Cucharamama (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Spaghetti with Mussels, Pine Nuts, Nutmeg, and Parsley \f2\emdash\f1  Barton Seaver,\par
Hook (Washington, DC)\par
Steamed Black Mussels, Coconut Broth, Red Curry Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto,\par
Tru (Chicago)\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise, garlic\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
monkfish\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, black\par
ONIONS, esp. red, spring, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
oysters\par
paella (key ingredient)\par
paprika: smoked, sweet\par
Parmesan cheese\par
PARSLEY: flat-leaf, curly\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
Pernod\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice and risotto\par
rosemary\par
SAFFRON\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
SHALLOTS\par
shrimp\par
snapper\par
sole\par
squid\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, clam, fish\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
TOMATOES\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: red wine, sherry\par
watercress\par
wild rice\par
WINE: dry white (e.g., Chardonnay, Pinot Blanc, Riesling, Sauvignon\par
Blanc)\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mussels + clams + garlic + onion + thyme + white wine\par
mussels + cream + curry + saffron\par
mussels + fennel + saffron + white wine\par
mussels + garlic + saffron + tomatoes\par
mussels + Dijon mustard + saffron\par
mussels + mustard + tarragon\par
mussels + olives + oranges\par
mussels + saffron + tarragon + tomatoes\par
MUSTARD\par
Taste: bitter\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 very loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
Use cucumbers to cut the taste of mustard.\par
apples: fruit, juice\par
avocados\par
bay leaf\par
beef, esp. corned, grilled, or roasted\par
beets\par
cabbage\par
capers\par
cheeses (e.g., blue, cheddar, Gruy\'e8re, and other hard) and cheese dishes\par
(e.g., macaroni and cheese, souffl\'e9)\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cold cuts\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cream and sour cream\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
cured meats\par
curries\par
curry leaves\par
dill\par
egg dishes\par
fennel\par
fenugreek\par
fish\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
fruits\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
gingerbread\par
green beans\par
ham\par
herbs\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine, as mustard seeds\par
Irish cuisine\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
meats, cold or hot\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint, esp. peppermint\par
mostarda (mustard fruits)\par
mussels\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pastrami\par
pepper: black, green, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher\par
sauces\par
sauerkraut\par
sausages\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
seafood\par
smoked fish\par
soy sauce\par
steaks\par
sumac\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vegetable-based dishes\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine, white wine\par
walnuts: nuts, oil\par
Good cooking transcends all cultures. You can take inspiration from all around\par
the world and apply it to what you are cooking without making it \ldblquote fusion.\rdblquote  In\par
some cases, you can even take a classic and make it taste better. I worked with\par
Floyd Cardoz [chef of the Indian restaurant Tabla in New York City] and learned\par
a lot about Indian spicing and technique from him. One technique was turka,\par
which is where you fry spices in oil or ghee [Indian clarified butter] until they\par
pop. It really opens up the flavor of the spices.\par
I use this cross-cultural technique when making a veal dish with a great\par
mustard sauce, which is a classic French dish, and the result is not a fusion dish:\par
Take black, yellow, and red mustard seeds and toast them in butter or olive oil\par
until they pop; then add some shallots and vermouth and reduce it. Then, add\par
veal stock with a splash of cream and Dijon mustard. The result is a very\par
complex sauce with a much deeper flavor, versus simply combining some cream\par
and mustard together in the pan.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mustard + curry leaves + cumin\par
mustard + garlic + oil + shallots + vinegar\par
mustard + garlic + oil + vinegar\par
mustard + oil + shallots + vinegar\par
MUSTARD GREENS (See Greens, Mustard)\par
Tarragon leads me to mustard which leads me to shellfish \f2\emdash\f1  which leads me to\par
mussels. The combination of the three is delicious.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
NECTARINES (See also Peaches)\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, poach, raw, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
almonds, esp. toasted\par
apricots\par
beverages, esp. cocktails\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
Champagne\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
custard\par
desserts and dessert sauces\par
figs\par
ginger, esp. fresh\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
milk, sweetened condensed\par
mint (garnish)\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
orange liqueur\par
peaches\par
peach liqueur (e.g., schnapps)\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pistachios\par
plums (compatible fruit)\par
pork\par
raspberries\par
salads, fruit\par
salsas, fruit\par
soups, esp. chilled\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, cider\par
WINE: red, fruity, sweet, or white: Merlot, Moscato d\rquote Asti, Muscat, Ros\'e9,\par
Sauternes, Vin Santo, Zinfandel\par
yogurt\par
NORTH AFRICAN CUISINE (See also Moroccan Cuisine)\par
allspice\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cumin\par
garlic, esp. in Egypt\par
ginger\par
lemons, preserved\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
onions\par
paprika\par
pepper, black\par
saffron\par
salads\par
spices, esp. in Morocco\par
turmeric\par
vegetables\par
Dishes\par
Roasted Nectarine Custard Cake with Ice Wine Sorbet and Warm Berry\par
Compote \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
New Orleans Nectar Soda \ldblquote Snow Cone\rdblquote  with Stewed Nectarines and Fresh\par
Raspberries \f2\emdash\f1  and Drizzle of Sweetened Condensed Milk \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Iacovone,\par
Cuv\'e9e (New Orleans)\par
NUTMEG\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Botanical relative: mace\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Use in moderation.\par
allspice\par
apples\par
baked dishes (e.g., biscuits, cakes, pies)\par
beef: braised, raw\par
berries\par
beverages (e.g., chocolate, eggnog)\par
broccoli\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
cakes\par
cardamom\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
CHEESE (ESP. RICOTTA) AND CHEESE DISHES\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chocolate\par
chowders (e.g., fish)\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cookies\par
coriander\par
CREAM / MILK\par
cumin\par
custards\par
DESSERTS\par
EGGNOG\par
eggs\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
fruits: dried, fresh\par
German cuisine\par
ginger\par
goat\par
Greek cuisine\par
green beans\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine, esp. sauces\par
jerk pastes, e.g., Caribbean\par
lamb, esp. braised\par
Latin American cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
MACE\par
meats (e.g., meatballs)\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
milk-based dishes\par
mushrooms\par
nuts\par
onions\par
oranges\par
parsnips\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
pastries\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pears\par
pepper\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
puddings\par
pumpkin\par
quatre \'e9pices (ingredient, with cloves, ginger, and white pepper)\par
raisins\par
RICE\par
sauces: b\'e9chamel, white\par
sausages\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
seafood\par
shellfish, shrimp\par
souffl\'e9s\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
SPINACH\par
squash, winter\par
stuffing\par
succotash\par
sugar, esp. brown\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
wine (e.g., mulled)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
nutmeg + allspice + cinnamon\par
nutmeg + cloves + cream\par
nutmeg + cloves + ginger + white pepper (quatre \'e9pices)\par
nutmeg + cream + spinach\par
NUTS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also Pecans, Walnuts, etc.)\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate (varies by nut)\par
Tips: Always toast nuts before using to enhance flavor and texture.\par
I love nuts, and put them in everything. I find that almost all nuts pair well with\par
a lot of different things. When I am creating a dessert, I will choose my nuts\par
geographically. For example, if I am making a Sicilian dessert, I\rquote ll use pistachios\par
because that is the nut they would use [in Sicily].\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Marcel Desaulniers of The Trellis in Williamsburg, Virginia, on\par
Nuts\par
We use a great deal of nuts at the restaurant. On our fall menu, we have nuts in\par
six out of ten entr\'e9es. Using nuts has always been one of my hallmarks in terms\par
of adding texture to everything from a salad or soup to entr\'e9es and desserts. This\par
philosophy hasn\rquote t changed much since 1987 when I opened. I can\rquote t think of a nut\par
that doesn\rquote t, in essence, work in both sweet and savory dishes.\par
Dishes from The Trellis in Williamsburg Featuring Nuts\par
Jumbo Lump Crab Cakes with Grilled Jumbo Asparagus and Toasted Maca\par
damia Nuts Grilled Chicken Breast with Stone-Ground Grits Cake, Toasted\par
Peanuts, and Spicy Peanut Sauce Chicken Salad: Diced Fresh Chicken Breast,\par
Granny Smith Apples, Pecans, Celery, Raisins, and Mayonnaise on Toasted\par
Buttermilk Bread, Served with Mesclun Greens Pan-Seared Sea Scallops and\par
Saut\'e9ed Shrimp with Country Ham, Shiitakes, Roasted Shallots, and PecanStudded Basmati Rice Spinach Fettuccine with Smoked Tomatoes, Artichokes,\par
Melted Sweet Onions, Fresh Herbs, Toasted Pine Nuts, and Black Pepper Butter\par
Chunk Light Tuna with Seedless Grapes, Chopped Walnuts, and Mayonnaise on\par
Toasted Whole Wheat Bread Garnished with Watercress, Grapes, and Walnuts\par
The quality of chopped nuts can never compare with the quality of whole nuts.\par
In 26 years, we have never bought chopped pecans because the quality is so\par
different, despite the fact that it would be a lot less expensive.\par
I recommend simply chopping by hand or, in the case of something like a\par
pecan, breaking it with your fingers. Pecans have so much moisture that if you\par
chop them, you lose what is special about their texture. People tend to put nuts\par
into the food processor and the next thing you know, you have powder and not\par
pieces.\par
We always toast our nuts, 100 percent of the time. Nuts absorb a lot of\par
moisture, so by toasting them you dry them out and heighten the flavor. You do\par
need to be careful, because they burn so easily. Slower roasting is better. With a\par
nut like a cashew, you want to roast them at 325 degrees to get them to be a nice,\par
golden brown.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
Always toast nuts to bring up the flavor. If you don\rquote t toast the nuts before\par
adding them to a dish, they tend to come out soggy when the dish is done. The\par
one exception would be if they are going on top of a tart going into the oven,\par
because then they would be overtoasted.\par
Nuts work great in adding texture, especially to creamy and/or moussey\par
desserts. The other way to balance out richness is with some phyllo dough.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Juicing nuts is the new thing we are doing. We\rquote ll juice almonds, hazelnuts, and\par
\f2\emdash\f1  best of all \f2\emdash\f1  pine nuts, which comes out like pine nut butter. Juicing pine\par
nuts is better than grinding them, because it pulverizes their fat. We put that on\par
some local green beans with preserved lemon zest, to serve with spring onions\par
with lamb.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Lavender works well with all sorts of nuts, including almonds, hazelnuts,\par
pistachios, and walnuts. The one nut it doesn\rquote t work well with is chestnuts.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Dishes\par
Cherry-Almond Granola with Greek Yogurt and Vanilla Honey \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Steel-Cut Oats, Devon Cream, Cinnamon Toast, and Cider-Roasted Apples\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Grown-Up Oatmeal Souffl\'e9 Served with Maple Syrup and Rum-Soaked\par
Currants \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington,\par
Virginia) OATMEAL / OATS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: simmer\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
breakfast\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cherries\par
chocolate, esp. dark, white\par
cider\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
currants\par
dates\par
figs, dried\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
lemon\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
milk\par
nectarines\par
orange\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
persimmons\par
pine nuts\par
plums\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rum, dark\par
salt (pinch)\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
oatmeal + currants + maple syrup\par
oatmeal + pears + vanilla + yogurt\par
OCTOPUS\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: grill, simmer, stew\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
chives\par
chorizo\par
dashi\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemon, juice\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
orange, juice\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
sake\par
salt, sea\par
soy sauce\par
tamarind\par
tangerine\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine\par
wine, red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
octopus + chorizo + lemon\par
octopus + jalape\'f1o peppers + mint\par
octopus + orange + potatoes\par
octopus + sake + sea salt\par
OIL, ALMOND\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, raw\par
almonds\par
asparagus\par
baked goods\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
duck\par
fish\par
Indian cuisine\par
mustard\par
pasta\par
romaine\par
salads\par
sauces\par
smoked salmon\par
vegetables\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar, champagne\par
OIL, AVOCADO\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: emulsify, fry, grill, raw, roast, salads, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocados\par
basil\par
chile peppers\par
corn\par
cucumber\par
emulsions\par
fish\par
garlic\par
grapefruit\par
guinea fowl\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
melon\par
orange, juice\par
pasta\par
rabbit\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
squid\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato water\par
tuna\par
vegetables\par
vegetarian dishes\par
vinegar: balsamic, chardonnay, white wine\par
zucchini\par
I like almond oil with asparagus salad.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I\rquote ll poach everything from saddle of rabbit to guinea fowl to fish \f2\emdash\f1  from\par
sturgeon, which holds up nicely, to New Zealand snapper to John Dory \f2\emdash\f1  in\par
avocado oil. It gives an incredible texture and depth of flavor. I also like it with\par
vegetarian dishes. I use it in dressings, and it seems to hold an emulsion really\par
well. It has a nice affinity with tomato; I have made tomato water with\par
chardonnay vinegar and avocado oil, and it makes beautiful light dressing. It also\par
goes well with citrus like lemon, lime, or orange. Just like you like to squeeze\par
some citrus over avocado, avocado oil works the same way in reverse.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Hazelnut oil gets mixed with cider vinegar; that is a great natural marriage. This\par
gets tossed in our baby winter spinach with mixed herbs and fris\'e9e salad. The\par
toasted nut quality mixes well with bitter greens.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Hazelnut oil is a wonderful autumn oil. We will use it in a dark balsamic\par
vinaigrette served with squab. It is also very good with broccoli. If you make a\par
broccoli soup, use this along with toasted hazelnuts. It is a delicious\par
combination.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
avocado oil + chardonnay vinegar + tomato water\par
OIL, CANOLA\par
Taste: neutral\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, saut\'e9\par
salads and salad dressings\par
AVOID\par
deep-fry\par
OIL, GRAPESEED\par
Taste: neutral\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: fry, raw, saut\'e9\par
coconut\par
marinades\par
salads and salad dressings\par
saut\'e9ed dishes\par
vinegar\par
OIL, HAZELNUT\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: raw\par
Tips: Avoid cooking, as it burns easily.\par
apples\par
artichokes\par
broccoli\par
cheese, fresh\par
desserts (e.g., candy, cookies)\par
figs\par
fish\par
greens, bitter\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon, juice\par
pastries\par
pears\par
persimmons\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
spinach\par
squab\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegars, esp. balsamic, cider, fruity\par
wild rice\par
OIL, MACADAMIA NUT\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, roast\par
fruit salads, esp. with tropical fruits\par
Hawaiian cuisine\par
macadamia nuts\par
rice salads\par
sauces\par
OIL, OLIVE (See Olive Oil)\par
OIL, PEANUT\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: fry, raw, salads, stir-fry\par
Asian cuisines\par
Chinese cuisine\par
cooking\par
fruits and fruit salads\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lentils\par
meats\par
peanuts\par
salad dressings, esp. Asian, fruit\par
soy sauce\par
vinegars, esp. balsamic, malt\par
OIL, PECAN\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, marinade\par
bread\par
fish\par
meat\par
pasta\par
rice\par
salads and salad dressings\par
vegetables\par
OIL, PISTACHIO\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
beets\par
bread\par
fish\par
mayonnaise\par
meat\par
pasta\par
salads and salad dressings\par
tuna\par
Pistachio oil beautifully complements tuna and asparagus in our dish Big Eye\par
Tuna Thinly Sliced with Provence White Asparagus and Montegotterro Pistachio\par
Oil.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
OIL, PORCINI\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
bread\par
cheese\par
mushrooms, esp. porcini\par
pasta\par
risotto\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
stews\par
OIL, PUMPKIN SEED\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Tips: Use to finish a dish, not to cook.\par
beef, rare\par
citrus\par
corn\par
desserts\par
ice cream\par
maple syrup\par
mustard, Dijon\par
pastries\par
pumpkin seeds\par
rice\par
soups\par
squash, winter\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider, rice wine\par
[Pumpkin seed oil] is good for finishing dishes with just a little drizzle. We\par
have even poured it over ice cream that is served with a pumpkin seed brittle.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
OIL, SESAME\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud (light to dark versions)\par
Techniques: raw\par
Tips: Add as a flavoring to raw or cooked dishes.\par
Asian cuisine\par
beef\par
cabbage, napa\par
chicken\par
chili powder\par
Chinese cuisine\par
fish\par
fruit salads\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens, esp. Asian\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
marinades\par
meats\par
miso soup\par
mustard\par
noodles\par
oil, vegetable (compatible oil)\par
orange\par
pepper, black\par
salads and salad dressings, esp. Asian\par
salt\par
sauces\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shiso\par
soy sauce\par
stir-fried dishes\par
tahini\par
tuna\par
vegetables\par
vinegar: cider, rice wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sesame oil + ginger + mustard + rice wine vinegar\par
OIL, TRUFFLE\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: raw\par
cheese\par
eggs\par
fish\par
mushrooms\par
pasta\par
risotto\par
salads and salad dressings\par
Dishes\par
Endive and Mushroom Salad, Blue Cheese, Spicy Pecans, White Balsamic\f2\endash\f1\par
White Truffle Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
OIL, WALNUT\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
Tips: Avoid cooking as it burns easily.\par
Truffle oil is one of those ingredients that really gets overused, so one day I\par
decided that I wanted to do truffle oil right. We make a dressing of truffle oil,\par
white balsamic vinegar, and whole grain mustard. We toss it over endive,\par
crumbled blue cheese, spicy pecans, and raw cremini mushrooms. You just can\rquote t\par
stop eating it!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
On Selecting the Right Oil\par
Your choice of olive oil always depends on what you are using it for. In general,\par
you don\rquote t want an oil that is super-assertive, green, or peppery. You want a good\par
olive flavor. I use a 100 percent Italian blend. It is silly to cook with 100 percent\par
extra-virgin olive oil if you are just saut\'e9ing something. If the oil is going to stay\par
in what you are making, like a sauce, then start with extra-virgin olive oil. When\par
I make a tomato sauce, that is what I am starting with.\par
If you are finishing a dish, that is also when you would use an assertive, more\par
full-flavored oil. I also like to use nut oils, especially those made by Jean\par
Leblanc. They are insane; his oils are so good that after you taste them, nothing\par
else will do! I especially like to use nut oils in the fall. I use walnut oil dressing\par
on salads, especially those salads that accompany meat. If you make a foie gras\par
dish with apples and endive, an addition of walnut oil would be great.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Olive oil comes in a wide variety of flavors and strengths even from the same\par
region, much like wine: \f2\bullet\f1  I use a heavier (e.g., Puglian, Umbrian, Sicilian) olive\par
oil on bigger-flavored dishes. A strong olive oil goes well on bean puree or a\par
strong vegetable like dandelion greens. In the United States, you would put a\par
barbecue sauce on a grilled meat; in Italy, you would use a strong olive oil.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  I use a lighter (e.g., Ligurian, Tuscan) olive oil on lighter meats like veal or fish\par
dishes and pastas. A Ligurian olive is full and bright and is great on a lighter\par
dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
\f2\bullet\f1  I like to use single varietal olive oil from Australia and New Zealand.\par
Australian olive oils can be like their wines: big, pungent, and spicy. New\par
Zealand oils have a little more depth of flavor and green grassiness.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
apples\par
baked goods\par
beets\par
bread\par
cheese, fresh\par
chicory\par
figs\par
fish, esp. grilled\par
fris\'e9e\par
greens, bitter\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
pasta\par
pears\par
persimmons\par
potatoes\par
SALADS AND SALAD DRESSINGS\par
sauces\par
steaks\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, fruit, red wine, sherry, tarragon\par
walnuts\par
OKRA\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, braise, deep-fry, fry, grill, saut\'e9, steam, stew\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
butter\par
cayenne\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, fresh green\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
corn and cornmeal\par
Creole cuisine\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
fennel seeds\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
gumbo\par
ham\par
Indian cuisine\par
LEMON, juice\par
lime, juice\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mustard seeds\par
oil: peanut, vegetable\par
onions, esp. red\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas, black-eyed\par
rice\par
salt, kosher\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
TOMATOES\par
turmeric\par
vinegar\par
yogurt\par
OLIVE OIL\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: cook, fry, raw, salads, sauces\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
I like Greek black olives the best. I like them by themselves, but they also work\par
great in a chicken, duck, or lamb dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Olives have such a strong flavor that they can overwhelm other ingredients, but\par
salmon will stand right up to it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
beans, white\par
chickpeas\par
fish\par
French cuisine, southern\par
garlic\par
herbs\par
hummus\par
Italian cuisine\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
olives\par
Parmesan cheese\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salt\par
soups\par
Spanish cuisine\par
thyme\par
vegetables\par
vinegar\par
OLIVES\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud (depending on type)\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
basil\par
bass\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
brandy\par
bread\par
butter\par
capers\par
cayenne\par
cheese: feta, goat\rquote s milk\par
chicken\par
cognac\par
cream cheese\par
cumin\par
fish\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
GARLIC\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisines\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
peppers, piquillo\par
Pernod\par
pine nuts\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sambuca\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
Dishes\par
Olive and Anchovy Tapenade with Sage Crackers \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia\par
(Houston)\par
shallots\par
Spanish cuisine\par
thyme\par
tomatoes: regular, sun-dried\par
tuna\par
veal\par
vinegar: red wine, sherry\par
wine, dry white\par
OMELETS (See Eggs and Egg-based Dishes)\par
ONIONS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: pungent (+ sweet with cooking via caramelization)\par
Botanical relatives: chives, garlic, leeks, shallots\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, boil, braise, deep-fry, fry, grill, roast, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
Tips: Onions increase appetite, and go with virtually all savory foods.\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans\par
beef, ground, e.g., hamburgers, meat loaf\par
beer\par
beets\par
bell peppers\par
brandy\par
bread: croutons, crumbs\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
cheese: cheddar, Comt\'e9, Emmental, fromage blanc, goat, Gruy\'e8re,\par
Parmesan, Swiss\par
The onion family is the basis for every cuisine I can think of. Of course, Asian\par
cuisines use more green onions and garlic, while the French use more shallots\par
and garlic, but it\rquote s the onion family providing the foundation.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
You can\rquote t cook without onions. There is not a single thing you can do without\par
onions. There are so many things made with onions that when people come in to\par
our restaurant and say that they are allergic to onions, I say, \ldblquote No, you are not \f2\emdash\f1\par
it is impossible. You just don\rquote t like onions.\rdblquote  People eat onions all the time and\par
just don\rquote t know it. I remember having a conversation with [the artist] Jasper\par
Johns, with him saying, \ldblquote If truffles and onions cost the same amount of money,\par
you would obviously choose an onion. You don\rquote t need truffles; you do need\par
onions.\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I roast onions a long, long time and use them to add a meaty flavor to soups.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Your cooking technique alters your flavors a great deal. If you put a lot of onions\par
in your curry but don\rquote t saut\'e9 them enough first, you will get a sweet flavor. If\par
you saut\'e9 the onions until they are almost burnt but not quite, your curry will\par
have more of a roasted-toasted flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  VIKRAM VIJ, VIJ\rquote S (VANCOUVER)\par
chile peppers, esp. jalape\'f1o\par
chili\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cream / milk\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cumin seeds\par
curry\par
dill\par
dips\par
eggs, e.g., omelets\par
garlic\par
greens, bitter\par
hamburgers\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
liver\par
mace\par
mangoes, esp. with red onions\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
milk\par
mint (e.g., Indian)\par
mirepoix (key ingredient)\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
Dishes\par
Roasted Vidalia Onion Stuffed with Walnuts, Wild Rice, and Roquefort\par
Served with Wilted Arugula, Fava Beans, and Vegetable Demi-Glace \f2\emdash\f1\par
Peter Nowakoski, Rat\rquote s (Hamilton, New Jersey)\par
NUTMEG\par
OIL: canola, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
Parmesan cheese\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
ponzu sauce\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
raisins, esp. golden\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads\par
SALT: fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
sandwiches\par
sauces and gravies\par
savory\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
stews\par
stocks: beef, chicken, veal\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
THYME, lemon\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine: dry red, white, port\par
Flavor Affinities\par
onions + balsamic vinegar + brown sugar\par
onions + beer + cheese + nutmeg\par
onions + garlic + thyme\par
ONIONS, SWEET (e.g., Vidalia)\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
basil\par
cayenne\par
chard\par
cheese: blue (e.g., Cabrales, Maytag), goat, Parmesan\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
ginger, fresh\par
herbs\par
lettuces\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
pine nuts\par
salads\par
salt\par
sandwiches\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar: rice, sherry\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Vidalia onions + goat cheese + tomatoes + sherry vinegar\par
ORANGES \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: poach, raw\par
Tips: Lemon brightens the flavor of orange.\par
almonds\par
anise seeds\par
Dishes\par
Baked Chocolate Mousse with Mandarin Oranges and Anise Seed\par
Croustillant \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Orange and Basil Soup, Alpine Strawberry Compote, and Mascarpone\par
Mousse \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Candied Orange Sponge with Poached Rhubarb and Cream Cheese Mousse\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Fran\'e7ois Payard, Payard Patisserie and Bistro (New York City) Orange Tart\par
with Carrot Cake and Mandarin \f2\emdash\f1  Fran\'e7ois Payard, Payard Patisserie and\par
Bistro (New York City)\par
I like orange zest with crab and shrimp because it gives them a sunny flavor.\par
Lemon and lime are too strong. Orange is feminine \f2\emdash\f1  the lady of citrus \f2\emdash\f1  while\par
lemon and lime are the men!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I use liqueurs such as [orange-flavored] Grand Marnier to bring out the flavors\par
of other ingredients. When it\rquote s done right, you don\rquote t even know it is there.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Orange and pomegranate season overlap in the fall, making these two fruits a\par
natural pairing.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
apples\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
arugula\par
avocados\par
bananas\par
basil\par
beets\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
ceviche\par
cheese: goat, ricotta\par
cherries\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. serrano\par
chives\par
CHOCOLATE: dark, white\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
crabs\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
cumin\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
fennel\par
figs: dried, fresh\par
fish\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
greens\par
grenadine syrup\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ices\par
juniper berries\par
Italian cuisine\par
Kirsch\par
kumquats\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lettuce, romaine\par
lime\par
lime leaf, kaffir\par
liqueurs, almond\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
melon\par
meringue\par
MINT\par
nectarines\par
oats\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
ONIONS, esp. green, red\par
orange, zest\par
orange liqueurs: Cointreau, Grand Marnier\par
papaya\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pomegranates\par
poppy seeds\par
pork, roast\par
port\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
saffron\par
salads, fruit and green\par
salt\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
shrimp\par
squash, winter (e.g., butternut)\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vinegar, esp. rice wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine: red, sweet, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
orange + anise + chocolate\par
orange + anise + dried figs + walnuts\par
orange + basil + sugar\par
orange + chocolate + pistachios\par
orange + cinnamon + honey + saffron\par
orange + seafood + tarragon\par
ORANGES, BLOOD\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 late spring\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
caramel\par
Champagne\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cream\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
kumquats\par
lemon\par
mint\par
pomegranates\par
salads\par
sugar, brown\par
tarts\par
vanilla\par
ORANGES, CLEMENTINE (See Oranges, Mandarin)\par
Dishes\par
Blood Orange\f2\endash\f1 Vanilla Creamsicle\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Dishes\par
Chocolate and Tangerine Semifreddo Garnished with Chopped Pistachios\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
ORANGES, MANDARIN (includes Clementines and Tangerines)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
Campari\par
caramel\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine (e.g., as dessert)\par
chives\par
chocolate, esp. dark\par
cream and ice cream\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cumin\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
duck\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
hazelnuts and hazelnut oil\par
honey\par
kumquats\par
lavender\par
LEMON JUICE\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lettuces\par
lime\par
lime leaf, kaffir\par
liqueurs, orange\par
mascarpone\par
melon\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
onions, green\par
oranges and blood oranges\par
passion fruit\par
pistachios\par
pomegranates\par
raspberries\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salads\par
salt\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
sesame oil\par
shellfish (e.g., crab)\par
shrimp\par
sugar\par
vinegar: champagne, rice, white wine\par
yogurt\par
OREGANO\par
Season: late autumn\f2\endash\f1 late spring\par
Botanical relative: marjoram (milder in flavor than oregano)\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Oregano can have great variability, i.e., from mild to hot and spicy\par
(e.g., Italian oregano is \ldblquote quieter\rdblquote  than Greek oregano).\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
basil\par
Avoid oregano with desserts. Oregano firmly belongs in savory cuisine; one\par
taste, and it immediately calls to mind pizza sauce!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
beans, esp. dried and/or white\par
beef\par
BELL PEPPERS\par
broccoli\par
broths\par
capers\par
cheese and cheese dishes: feta, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. piquillo\par
chili con carne, esp. Mexican oregano\par
chili powder\par
chives\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
duck\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
eggplant\par
FISH, esp. oilier, and esp. baked or grilled\par
garlic\par
Greek cuisine\par
greens, bitter\par
grilled dishes\par
hamburgers\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
*LEMON\par
marjoram\par
MEATS, esp. red and/or grilled, and meat-based dishes\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint (say some)\par
mole sauces, esp. with Mexican oregano\par
mushrooms\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
PASTA AND PASTA SAUCES\par
pepper, black\par
PIZZA\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
quail\par
rabbit\par
roasts\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings, esp. Greek\par
sauces\par
sausages\par
seafood\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups, esp. chicken, fish, vegetable\par
Spanish cuisine\par
squash, summer\par
squid\par
stews\par
stuffing\par
swordfish\par
Tex-Mex cuisine\par
thyme\par
*TOMATOES AND TOMATO SAUCES\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. summer\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar\par
zucchini\par
AVOID\par
cilantro\par
desserts\par
dill\par
mint (say some)\par
tarragon\par
Flavor Affinities\par
oregano + basil + tomato\par
oregano + lemon juice + marjoram\par
OXTAILS (See Beef)\par
OYSTERS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring (aka \ldblquote months containing the letter r\rdblquote )\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 heavy (e.g., light Kumamotos to heavy Gulf Coast oysters)\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, raw, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
aioli\par
apples\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beer / ale\par
beets\par
bread, esp. dark\par
bread crumbs, panko\par
butter, unsalted\par
If you come to Chanterelle during November and December, you will see\par
oysters with white truffles when they are both in season and they are classics for\par
this restaurant.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Dishes\par
Oysters Served with Tomatillo-Habanero \ldblquote Mi\'f1oneta,\rdblquote  Smoky ChipotleGarlic Salsa and Fresh-Cut Limes \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Bayless, Frontera Grill (Chicago)\par
Oysters on the Half Shell with Champagne Mignonette and Fresh\par
Horseradish \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Cajun cuisine\par
capers\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
Champagne\par
chervil\par
chili sauce\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
cocktail sauce\par
cornmeal (for crust)\par
CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
Creole cuisine\par
cucumbers\par
daikon\par
fennel\par
flour (for dredging)\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
gazpacho\par
ginger\par
hollandaise sauce\par
horseradish\par
lavender\par
LEEKS\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lime, juice\par
mint\par
mushrooms, wild\par
OIL: canola, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, Spanish\par
orange\par
oyster juice\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
ponzu sauce\par
potatoes\par
risotto\par
saffron\par
sake\par
salmon, smoked\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauces: cocktail, mignonette\par
scallions\par
sea urchin\par
seaweed\par
SHALLOTS\par
shiso leaf\par
shrimp\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
Southern cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, clam, fish, vegetable\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tapioca\par
thyme\par
tomatoes: flesh, juice\par
truffles: black, white\par
vermouth\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, red wine, rice, sherry\par
WINE, dry white\par
yuzu juice\par
AVOID\par
tarragon\par
Flavor Affinities\par
oysters + caviar + leeks\par
oysters + caviar + tapioca\par
oysters + clams + potatoes + thyme\par
oysters + cream + horseradish + onions\par
oysters + ginger + horseradish + sherry vinegar\par
oysters + horseradish + champagne vinegar\par
oysters + Muscadet + shallots + vinegar\par
oysters + shallots + vinegar\par
PANCETTA\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: fry\par
arugula\par
beans\par
butter\par
cheese: fontina, Parmesan\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine\par
lentils\par
meats\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
PASTA\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
pistachios\par
poultry\par
SAUCES\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
PAPAYAS\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, grill, raw, saut\'e9\par
bananas\par
beverages (e.g., smoothies)\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
carrots, esp. with green\par
chile peppers: jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
chocolate, white\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus fruits\par
coconut: meat, milk\par
cream and ice cream\par
curries\par
fish sauce\par
garlic, esp. with green papayas\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
honey\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
lemon, juice\par
LIME, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mango\par
marinades\par
melon\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
orange\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
port\par
prosciutto\par
raspberries\par
salads, fruit\par
salsa\par
salt, esp. with green\par
shrimp, esp. dried with green papaya\par
sorbet\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: rice, white wine\par
yogurt\par
PAPRIKA \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 hot, depending on variety (e.g., hot, sweet, smoked, etc.)\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the beginning of the cooking process.\par
allspice\par
barbecue\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
butter, unsalted\par
Cajun cuisine\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
cauliflower\par
cheese\par
CHICKEN, esp. baked or paprikash\par
chili\par
crabs\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
curries\par
duck\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled and egg dishes (e.g., omelets)\par
European cuisines\par
fish, esp. baked\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
goulash (key ingredient)\par
hummus\par
Hungarian cuisine\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
legumes\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
octopus\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprikash\par
parsley\par
pepper, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salads: pasta, potato\par
salt, sea\par
sauces, esp. cream\par
sausage, esp. chorizo\par
seafood\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
Spanish cuisine\par
stews, esp. fish\par
stock, chicken\par
tagines\par
thyme\par
Turkish cuisine\par
turmeric\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
paprika + beef + sour cream\par
PAPRIKA, SMOKED\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
bacon\par
beans, esp. white\par
We use lots of smoked paprika, but need to be careful because it can be really\par
strong. I like to finish our fried chickpeas with this because it makes them taste\par
like they just jumped out of the fire! We also like to mix our paprikas together,\par
typically in equal proportions of sweet, hot, and smoked. Smoked paprika is\par
primarily smoky and doesn\rquote t have a lot of other flavors. So if you combine it\par
with a vibrant sweet paprika, you\rquote ll get a more rounded pepper flavor. Paprika is\par
also very regional. In the south [of Spain] where it gets sunshine and heat, you\par
see more smoked paprika, but in the north where it is colder and rainy, they are\par
not into the heat.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
cheese\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chorizo\par
clams\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
fish (e.g., skate)\par
garlic\par
lamb\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
meats, esp. grilled or roasted\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
octopus\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paella\par
pepper, black\par
peppers, piquillo\par
pork, esp. ribs\par
potatoes\par
sage\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
soups\par
steaks\par
stews\par
tomatoes\par
turkey, esp. roasted\par
vegetables\par
vegetarian meals\par
Flavor Affinities\par
smoked paprika + mayonnaise + seafood\par
PARSLEY\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Tips: Use fresh. Parsley generally refers to flat-leaf parsley. Parsley is great\par
for blending, as it is compatible with virtually all other herbs.\par
avocados\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. dried\par
beef\par
bouquet garni (ingredient, along with bay leaf, marjoram, thyme)\par
braised dishes\par
bulgur wheat\par
butter\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
cheese, esp. Parmesan, ricotta\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
clams\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (ingredient)\par
FISH\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
game\par
GARLIC\par
halibut\par
ham\par
herbs (as a flavor enhancer)\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon balm\par
lentils\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
oils: hazelnut, walnut\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
oysters\par
parsnips\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
pesto (ingredient)\par
pizza\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salads, esp. egg, green, pasta, potato, or rice\par
salsa verde (ingredient)\par
sauces\par
sausages\par
savory\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
skate\par
snails\par
sorrel\par
SOUPS\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. southern\par
spinach\par
stews\par
stocks\par
stuffings\par
sumac\par
tabbouleh (key ingredient)\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
zucchini\par
AVOID\par
desserts\par
The Spanish use parsley stems for cooking, and fresh as a garnish before\par
serving. When you make rice or beans, you would put a stem in. To me, parsley\par
added to fish or shellfish makes the dish tastes more \ldblquote marine,\rdblquote  as opposed to\par
earthy. I love salsa verde, which is a sauce made with basically a ton of parsley,\par
garlic, and some kind of juice like clam juice. It\rquote s wonderful served with fish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY) People do not\par
understand parsley; they think it is green specks. But it is wonderful with fish. If\par
you make a straight-up linguini with clam sauce, you want a big handful of\par
chopped parsley in there \f2\emdash\f1  not for the appearance, but for the taste. It is an\par
important component in a lot of dishes and needs to be there. It can also be used\par
as a sauce all on its own. If you sprinkle it on a steak, it will not have the impact\par
that it would on fish. On the other hand, if you make a Ma\'eetre d\rquote h\'f4tel butter\par
[butter flavored with lemon juice and parsley] and put it on the steak, the parsley\par
has a role there. On vegetables, if you make glazed carrots or pearl onions or a\par
stew with lots of vegetables, parsley stirred in at the last moment is good stuff.\par
As for my choice of parsley, I always use flat Italian-style parsley.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY) Salsa verde is\par
my favorite all-purpose condiment at home. I like it on fish, lamb, and steak. It is\par
made with anchovy, garlic, shallots, olive oil, and herbs \f2\emdash\f1  primarily parsley,\par
but also chervil, chives, tarragon, a little bit of marjoram, and sometimes a little\par
mint if I am in the mood. I add the acid at the last moment so it won\rquote t change the\par
color of the herbs, and will choose between Banyuls or red wine vinegar, or\par
lemon juice. If I am serving meat, I will use vinegar; if I am serving fish, I will\par
use lemon. Even though it changes color once the acid is added, it lasts a few\par
days. It is really good on a piece of bread or with some fresh farmer\rquote s cheese as\par
a snack.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TRACI DES JARDINS, JARDINI\'c8RE (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
parsley + bulgur wheat + garlic + lemon + mint + olive oil + scallions\par
parsley + butter + garlic\par
parsley + capers + garlic + lemon zest + olive oil\par
parsley + garlic\par
parsley + garlic + lemon zest\par
parsley + garlic + olive oil + Parmesan cheese + vinegar\par
parsley + lemon juice + olive oil + Parmesan cheese\par
PARSNIPS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques/Tips: Always use cooked (never raw): bake, boil, braise, deepfry, grill, mash, puree, roast, steam\par
allspice\par
anise\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, black, green\par
BUTTER, brown and/or unsalted\par
carrots\par
cheese, esp. creamy\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
duck\par
fennel: leaves, seeds\par
fish\par
game\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger, esp. ground\par
greens, bitter / winter\par
honey\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
lovage\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
meats\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
mirin\par
Dishes\par
Passion Fruit and Bonito Caramel\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Passion Fruit Flip: Passion Fruit + Honey + Lime + Raspberries + Yogurt\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru (Chicago)\par
Passion Fruit Cream Enrobed in White Chocolate, Ginger Caramel, and\par
Mandarin Sorbet \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
mushrooms, porcini\par
mustard\par
NUTMEG\par
oil: peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange\par
pancetta\par
parsley\par
Parmesan cheese\par
pears\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt\par
shallots\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
stews\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar, brown\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vegetables, root\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine, dry white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
parsnips + butter + cream + potatoes\par
parsnips + carrots + nutmeg + potatoes\par
parsnips + cream + nutmeg\par
parsnips + honey + mustard\par
parsnips + pancetta + Parmesan cheese + pasta\par
PASSION FRUIT\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: puree, raw\par
almonds\par
bananas\par
beverages\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
Champagne\par
chicken\par
chives\par
chocolate, esp. dark, white\par
cilantro\par
citrus fruit\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
Cointreau\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
custard\par
egg whites\par
fish\par
fruits, tropical\par
ginger\par
kiwi fruit\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
orange, juice\par
papayas\par
peaches\par
pears\par
pineapples\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salads, fruit\par
salad dressings\par
soups, fruit\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR\par
tapioca\par
tequila\par
vanilla\par
wine, ice\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
passion fruit + banana + orange\par
passion fruit + caramel + coconut\par
passion fruit + caramel + ginger + white chocolate\par
passion fruit + cream + ice wine\par
passion fruit + dark chocolate + ginger + raspberries\par
PASTA\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy (depending on the cut)\par
Volume: quiet\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beans, e.g., fava, white\par
beef\par
bottarga (tuna roe)\par
bread crumbs\par
broccoli\par
broths, esp. chicken, esp. with small pasta\par
butter\par
capers\par
cauliflower\par
CHEESE: cheddar, Comt\'e9, Emmental, Fontina, goat, Gorgonzola, Gouda,\par
Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, PARMESAN, pecorino, ricotta, ricotta salata\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
Dishes\par
Goat Cheese Tortelloni with Dried Orange and Fennel Pollen \f2\emdash\f1  Mario\par
Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Mint Tagliatelle with Lamb and Olives\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Spaghettini with Spicy Artichokes, Sweet Garlic, and Lobster \f2\emdash\f1  Mario\par
Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Spaghetti Primavera with Prosciutto, Spring Garlic, Sugar Snap Peas, and\par
Parmigiano \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Homemade Pappardelle with Lamb Bolognese and Sheep\rquote s Milk Ricotta \f2\emdash\f1\par
Andrew Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Homemade Soft Egg Yolk\f2\endash\f1 Filled Raviolo with Truffled Butter \f2\emdash\f1  Odette\par
Fada, San Domenico (New York City)\par
Homemade Straccetti with Pesto and Clams \f2\emdash\f1  Odette Fada, San Domenico\par
(New York City)\par
Linguini with Clams, Pancetta, and Spicy Fresno Chile Pesto \f2\emdash\f1  Matt\par
Molina, Osteria Mozza (Los Angeles)\par
Farfalle with Stridoli, Walnuts, and Chanterelles \f2\emdash\f1  Matt Molina, Osteria\par
Mozza (Los Angeles)\par
Tagliatelle with Chanterelles and Parmigiano Reggiano \f2\emdash\f1  Holly Smith, Caf\'e9\par
Juanita (Seattle)\par
Butternut Squash Ravioli with Oxtail Rag\'f4ut and Sage Cream \f2\emdash\f1  David\par
Waltuck, Chanterelle (New York City)\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
clams\par
cream, esp. with fettuccine, festonate, gnocchi, or pappardelle\par
cured meats: bacon, ham, pancetta, prosciutto\par
duck confit\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fish (e.g., cod, salmon, swordfish, tuna)\par
game, esp. with fettuccine or pappardelle\par
garlic\par
greens (e.g., arugula, radicchio, stridoli)\par
ITALIAN CUISINE\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lobster\par
mascarpone\par
meat, esp. beef, lamb, oxtail, pork, venison\par
meat, ground, esp. with penne and rigatoni\par
mint\par
mushrooms, esp. wild\par
mussels\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
octopus\par
OLIVE OIL, esp. with linguini and spaghetti\par
olives\par
onions\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
peas, esp. with penne and rigatoni\par
pecans\par
Pairing Pastas with Sauces\par
Which sauces pair best with which pastas? We asked chef Odette Fada of New\par
York City\rquote s San Domenico restaurant.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Angel hair: In Italy, angel hair pasta is served to old people who can\rquote t chew.\par
It\rquote s for grandparents, or for others to eat when they are sick. The problem with\par
angel hair pasta is it\rquote s so thin it\rquote s hard to cook al dente, and I like my pasta a\par
little chewy.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Bow tie: Fresh bow tie is great when made by hand, because it stays folded and\par
doesn\rquote t open into a square. I like to serve it with vegetables and tomato-based\par
sauces.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Fettuccine: This is a flavorful pasta and is good with a Bolognese sauce.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Fusilli: I like their [corkscrew] shape, but they tend to break easily so they are\par
not that attractive when you cook them in a restaurant setting. I like them at\par
home in a salad or with some pesto because the pesto sticks to it.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Hollow pasta [e.g., macaroni, penne, rigatoni]: Good with sauces that have big\par
chunks in them so that the sauce pieces go inside whole. I like to do penne with\par
fresh peas because the peas will slip inside, so you\rquote ll sometimes get a little\par
surprise when you\rquote re chewing.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Pappardelle: This is a strong, rustic pasta. I like it with rabbit sauce, a rago\'fbt,\par
or a fish sauce that has some character.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Small pasta [e.g., rice-, shell-, or star-shaped]: These are good for soups and\par
brothy dishes. For example, you would use them with a brothy fish dish.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Spaghetti: Everything goes with spaghetti! It is a pasta that sauce sticks to.\par
Everything from tomato sauce to pesto to pecorino with black pepper is great\par
with spaghetti.\par
Or, if you\rquote re starting with the sauce:\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Carbonara: Spaghetti or bucatini, you want a pasta that the sauce will stick to.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Cream: Fettuccine, pappardelle, or gnocchi, since cream is so rich you want a\par
strong-flavored pasta or, in the last case, gnocchi \f2\emdash\f1  one that is made with some\par
egg in it.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Game: Pappardelle or fettuccine; you want an egg-rich pasta with some flavor.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Olive oil and garlic: Spaghetti.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Pesto: Fusilli.\par
\f2\bullet\f1  Tomato: This works with almost all pasta shapes, from small to large.\par
I have played with lots of flavored pasta doughs. One of my favorites is olive\par
because it holds its flavor. Other flavors that hold up well are squid ink and\par
saffron. I have also made a pappardelle with cocoa powder that I paired with\par
game sauce that worked great. If you wanted to achieve a particular color, you\par
could create red pasta with beets, green pasta with spinach, and black pasta with\par
squid ink.\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
pumpkin\par
rabbit, braised, esp. with pappardelle\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt, esp. kosher\par
sardines\par
SAUCES: Bolognese (esp. with fettuccine), carbonara (esp. with bucatini\par
or spaghetti), Mornay (esp. with macaroni), pesto (esp. with fusilli), rabbit\par
(esp. with pappardelle), sardines (esp. with bucatini), tomato\par
sausage\par
scallops\par
seafood: clams, crab, lobster, mussels, octopus, scallops, shrimp, squid\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
squash: summer, winter\par
squid\par
sweet potato\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tomatoes, sun-dried\par
truffles: black, white\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
venison\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic\par
walnuts\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pasta + anchovies + bread crumbs + capers + red pepper flakes + garlic +\par
olives\par
pasta + anchovies + mozzarella cheese\par
pasta + artichokes + garlic + lobster\par
pasta + bacon + black pepper + eggs + olive oil + pecorino cheese\par
pasta + basil + garlic + tomato\par
pasta + basil + peas + shrimp\par
pasta + basil + scallops + tomato\par
pasta + bread crumbs + greens + shrimp + white beans\par
pasta + bread crumbs + raisins + sardines\par
pasta + chickpeas + garlic + sage\par
pasta + chile peppers + lobster + mint\par
pasta + clams + pancetta\par
pasta + cream + peas + prosciutto\par
pasta + duck confit + wild mushrooms\par
pasta + fennel + sausage + tomato + white beans\par
pasta + figs + pancetta\par
pasta + Gorgonzola cheese + spinach + walnuts\par
pasta + Gruy\'e8re cheese + nutmeg + ricotta cheese\par
pasta + lamb + lemon + rosemary\par
pasta + lamb + mint + olives\par
pasta + lobster + peas\par
pasta + mushrooms + pumpkin + sage\par
pasta + pancetta + stridoli\par
pasta + Parmesan cheese + sage + tomato\par
pasta + pesto + white beans\par
pasta + pumpkin + pecans + ricotta cheese + sage\par
pasta + red pepper flakes + fennel + sardines + tomatoes\par
pasta + red pepper flakes + garlic + olive oil\par
pasta + ricotta cheese + veal shanks\par
pasta + rosemary + venison\par
pasta + spinach + ricotta cheese\par
pasta + tomatoes + ricotta cheese\par
Chef Odette Fada of New York\rquote s San Domenico on Making\par
Ravioli\par
I love ravioli! Anything and everything goes in my ravioli \f2\emdash\f1  I have used\par
everything from chestnuts to cheese to fish, meat, and vegetables. You can vary\par
the ravioli dough as well as the stuffing. For example, I serve ravioli stuffed with\par
sea urchin and the dough is light and made with just flour and water. For a\par
stronger filling like lamb, I will use some egg in the dough which makes it\par
bigger flavored. One of my favorite ravioli stuffings is black truffle and pancetta.\par
The truffle provides a crunchiness when you bite into it.\par
One of the greatest ravioli we do dates back to the chef for the last king of\par
Italy at the beginning of the twentieth century. It is stuffed with spinach, truffle,\par
Parmesan cheese, and an egg yolk, and served with butter, truffle, and Parmesan\par
cheese. When the ravioli is cooked, it is served with the yolk warm but not\par
cooked. It is truly an amazing dish.\par
In Italy during the winter, you would typically have some slices of sausage on\par
top of a plate of lentils. I decided to combine the two into a ravioli dish. Now,\par
one of my other favorite dishes is our ravioli stuffed with cotechino [sausage]\par
and lentils. The lentils are cooked with rosemary, garlic, extra-virgin olive oil,\par
and prosciutto skin, and go into the ravioli with the sausage, parsley, and\par
Parmesan cheese. The dish is finished with some strong extra-virgin olive oil,\par
parsley, and a crack of pepper.\par
PEACHES\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, poach, raw, roast, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
ALMONDS, esp. toasted\par
anise hyssop\par
apples\par
apricots, puree\par
arugula\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beverages, esp. cocktails\par
blackberries\par
BLUEBERRIES\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
Calvados\par
caramel\par
Champagne\par
cherries\par
chile peppers, green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
cognac\par
Cointreau\par
*CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants, red: fruit, jelly\par
custards\par
desserts and dessert sauces\par
figs\par
fruit crisp\par
ginger\par
Grand Marnier\par
grenadine\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice, esp. pistachio\par
ice cream, esp. vanilla\par
Kirsch\par
lavender\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon thyme\par
lemon verbena\par
lime, juice\par
liqueurs: nut, orange, peach (e.g., schnapps)\par
mace\par
Madeira\par
maple syrup\par
Marsala\par
mascarpone\par
mint\par
molasses\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
Dishes\par
Jim Core\rquote s Peaches Upside-Down Cake with Blueberry Sorbet \f2\emdash\f1  John Besh,\par
August (New Orleans)\par
Saffron Panna Cotta with Peaches, Peach Sorbetto, and Lemon Balm \f2\emdash\f1\par
Gina DePalma, Babbo (New York City)\par
White Peach Melba with Raspberry Granita \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef,\par
Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Warm Ginger Cake Sabayon with Spiced Peaches \f2\emdash\f1  Chuck Subra, La C\'f4te\par
Brasserie (New Orleans)\par
When I think of the essence of peaches, it\rquote s their smell \f2\emdash\f1  so I think of echoing\par
that with the floralness of Moscato d\rquote Asti. I\rquote ll add acidity, sweetness, and a little\par
fat, such as through cr\'e8me fra\'eeche.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  TONY LIU, AUGUST (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I try not to cook peaches, or if I do, only for a short amount of time. A peach pie\par
never tastes as good to me as a blueberry pie, because it tastes too cooked by the\par
time you get it thick enough. So if I get peaches, I\rquote ll chop them up and put them\par
on a tart shell that is already cooked instead.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
I like peaches with rich, round flavors like vanilla and honey.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Japanese baby peaches are tiny peaches about the size of olives. We wanted to\par
showcase the peaches and thought, What do peaches go with? Cream. We took\par
that one step further and used yogurt instead. So we chose Greek yogurt, paired\par
it with the peaches, then garnished the dish with Hawaiian pink sea salt, Greek\par
olive oil, reduced balsamic vinegar, and micro mint. We turned the water\par
strained from the yogurt into \ldblquote air\rdblquote  [foam]. This is a dish that we serve as a predessert and it works well because it is sweet and savory.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
oil, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, yellow\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pineapple\par
PISTACHIOS\par
plums\par
port\par
raisins\par
RASPBERRIES: fruit, puree\par
rum\par
saffron\par
salads, fruit\par
salsas, fruit\par
salt\par
soups, esp. cold\par
sour cream\par
star anise\par
STRAWBERRIES (e.g., fruit, puree)\par
SUGAR: BROWN, confectioners\rquote , white\par
tarragon\par
tea\par
thyme\par
VANILLA\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, rice, white\par
Vin Santo\par
violets, esp. candied\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
whiskey\par
WINE: dry or fruity red or white or sweet (e.g., Asti, Burgundy, Merlot,\par
sweet Muscat, Riesling, Ros\'e9, Zinfandel)\par
yogurt\par
zabaglione\par
Flavor Affinities\par
peaches + apples + vanilla\par
peaches + blueberries + mascarpone\par
peaches + cream + honey + vanilla\par
peaches + figs + maple syrup\par
peaches + ginger + sugar\par
peaches + orange liqueur + vanilla\par
peaches + sugar + yogurt\par
PEANUT OIL (See Oil, Peanut)\par
PEANUTS AND PEANUT BUTTER (See also Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  In\par
General)\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
African cuisine\par
apples\par
BANANAS\par
basil\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
Burmese cuisine\par
butter\par
caramel\par
cayenne\par
chicken\par
chile peppers (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
Chinese cuisine\par
CHOCOLATE, ESP. DARK, MILK\par
cilantro\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
coffee\par
curries\par
curry paste, Thai red\par
curry powder\par
desserts\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
garlic\par
grape jelly\par
honey\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
mole sauces\par
noodles\par
oatmeal\par
oil: peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley\par
pears\par
pork\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
Rice Krispies\par
salads\par
salt\par
sauces\par
shrimp\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
soy sauce\par
stir-fried dishes\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tarragon\par
Thai cuisine\par
Anything we put peanuts on sells! Peanuts are associated with the South, so\par
there is a regional appeal. We had a chicken breast with sugar snap peas, white\par
radishes, toasted peanuts, basmati rice, and spicy peanut sauce.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
Peanuts are not as versatile as other nuts. They have a great flavor and are pretty\par
generic so you can use them on a lot of things and they pair well. Milk chocolate\par
and peanuts work really well together. Peanuts pair great with bananas,\par
especially if you cover the banana in chocolate and then roll it in peanuts and\par
freeze it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinegar, red wine\par
PEARS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, deep-fry (e.g., as chips), grill, poach, raw, roast, saut\'e9,\par
stew\par
allspice\par
ALMONDS and almond paste\par
anise\par
apples: fruit, juice\par
apricots, esp. dried or pureed\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
beets\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
borage\par
bourbon\par
brandy, esp. pear\par
butter, brown\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
butterscotch\par
Calvados\par
CARAMEL\par
cardamom\par
cassis\par
celery\par
Champagne\par
CHEESE: BLUE, Brie, Cabrales, Cambozola, Camembert, Cantal,\par
cheddar, feta, goat, Gorgonzola, Monterey Jack, Parmesan, pecorino,\par
ricotta, Romano, ROQUEFORT, Stilton\par
cherries: dried, fresh\par
chestnuts\par
Chinese cuisine, esp. featuring Asian pears\par
CHOCOLATE, esp. dark, white\par
cider\par
CINNAMON\par
CLOVES\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
custards\par
dates\par
dill\par
duck and duck confit\par
endive\par
fennel\par
figs\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
ginger\par
Grand Marnier\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY\par
ice cream, vanilla\par
Italian cuisine\par
Kirsch\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
liqueurs: almond, hazelnut, orange\par
macadamia nuts\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
Marsala\par
MASCARPONE\par
meats, esp. fatty, grilled, and/or roasted\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint (garnish)\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oats\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
onions, green\par
ORANGE: fruit, juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
peanuts\par
pear brandy\par
pear cider\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
Poire William\par
pork\par
port: red, white\par
poultry\par
praline\par
prosciutto\par
prunes\par
quinces\par
radicchio\par
raisins\par
raspberries: fruit, puree\par
rhubarb\par
rice (e.g., pudding)\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
This salad has roasted pear, Roquefort cheese, lemon, and olive oil and is\par
garnished with borage flowers. The sauce is burnt caramel with pepper deglazed\par
with Coteaux du Layon, which is sweet but higher in acid than Sauternes. The\par
caramel sauce keeps you awake!\par
Cheese and fruit: Blue cheese is sharp and hits your palate, then the pear\par
calms it down.\par
Salad greens: We use herbs in our salad and this one has fennel, thyme,\par
tarragon, parsley, and anise hyssop.\par
Borage flowers: Eating a borage flower is like eating an oyster! It is briny. In\par
the summer when they are in season, if you taste a couple it is reminiscent of a\par
mild oyster.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GABRIEL KREUTHER, THE MODERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Apples are more popular than pears because when you go to the store, pears are\par
all hard. You buy them, bring them home, and wait forever for them to ripen.\par
You have to have a premeditated use for pears.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
I like pears poached because I\rquote m not fond of their texture. I also make a pear\par
tart with pears poached in lemon zest and vanilla, and then combined with\par
custard, honey, lemon, and vanilla. It is paired with a honey grappa zabaglione\par
and topped with grated Pecorino Toscano cheese grated over it as if it were\par
pasta. The dish sounds a little crazy but all these flavors are classic combinations\par
found in Italy. Pears are often infused with grappa in the north of Italy. Pears,\par
honey, and pecorino is a classic combination in Tuscany. Pecorino goes with\par
every flavor. Honey carries all the flavors forward.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
sabayon\par
salads: fruit, green\par
salt (pinch)\par
sour cream\par
squab\par
squash: butternut, winter\par
star anise\par
strawberries, esp. sauce\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
toffee\par
VANILLA\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, sherry, white, white wine\par
WALNUTS\par
watercress\par
whiskey\par
WINE: red (e.g., Burgundy), strong red (e.g., Cabernet Sauvignon,\par
Zinfandel), dry white (e.g., Riesling), sparkling (e.g., Champagne), sweet\par
(e.g., ice wine)\par
Dishes\par
Pear and Fresh Pecorino\f2\endash\f1 Filled Ravioli with Aged Pecorino and Crushed\par
Black Pepper \f2\emdash\f1  Lidia Bastianich, Felidia (New York City)\par
Grilled Pear and Roquefort Tart with Caramelized Onions and Walnuts \f2\emdash\f1\par
Sandy D\rquote Amato, Sanford (Milwaukee)\par
Grilled Pear Steak with Polenta Frites and Orange-Tarragon Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Edibles (Vancouver)\par
Salad of Spicy Poached Pear, Fresh Ricotta, Smoked Almonds, and\par
Edamame with Verjus Dressing \f2\emdash\f1  Brad Farmerie, Monday Room (New York\par
City)\par
Sticky Toffee Pudding with Cinnamon-Saut\'e9ed Pears \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, at the\par
2005 James Beard Awards gala reception\par
Warm Semolina Pancake, Poached Pears, Cumin \f2\emdash\f1  Johnny Iuzzini, pastry\par
chef, Jean Georges (New York City) Honey-Roasted Pear Napoleon\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Kate Zuckerman, pastry chef, Chanterelle (New York City)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pears + amaretto + hazelnuts\par
pears + arugula + Parmesan cheese + vinaigrette + walnuts\par
pears + bacon + bitter greens + goat cheese\par
pears + blue cheese + olive oil + red wine vinegar + watercress\par
pears + caramel + balsamic vinegar\par
pears + caramel + chestnuts + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
pears + caramel + chocolate\par
pears + cinnamon + ginger + honey\par
pears + fennel + Parmesan cheese + balsamic vinegar + walnuts\par
pears + ginger + honey + vanilla\par
pears + Gorgonzola cheese + vinaigrette + walnuts\par
pears + honey + lime + vanilla\par
pears + honey + rosemary\par
pears + maple syrup + walnuts\par
pears + mascarpone + pistachios + red wine\par
pears + pecorino cheese + balsamic vinegar\par
pears + Roquefort cheese + sugar + vanilla + red wine\par
pears + Roquefort cheese + walnuts\par
pears + Stilton cheese + hazelnuts + balsamic vinegar\par
PEAS \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also Snap Peas)\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: boil, braise, saut\'e9, steam\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
BASIL\par
bay leaf\par
bouquet garni\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
cardamom\par
CARROTS and carrot juice\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese, esp. Parmesan, ricotta\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chives\par
cilantro, (e.g., as Indian cuisine)\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
crab\par
CREAM, HEAVY\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
fava beans\par
fish\par
French cuisine\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
ham and ham hocks\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lettuce, Boston\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
MINT\par
mushrooms, esp. morels\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions: pearl, red, spring, white\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
savory, winter\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
snap peas\par
sorrel\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. southern\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, champagne\par
watercress\par
wine, dry white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
peas + bacon + cream + shallots\par
peas + basil + potatoes\par
peas + celery + olive oil + onions + chicken stock + sugar\par
peas + custard + Parmesan cheese\par
peas + lobster + pasta\par
peas + marjoram + mascarpone + Parmesan cheese\par
peas + mint + morel mushrooms\par
peas + mushrooms + ricotta cheese\par
peas + onions + pancetta + sage\par
Bronze fennel grows all over Seattle. One day I walked outside eating peas\par
while going out to get mint for my pea salad. I ate a bite of fennel and thought,\par
\ldblquote By Jove, I\rquote ve got a dish!\rdblquote  Bronze fennel is a non-bulb fennel that has an\par
amazing fennel and earthy flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  HOLLY SMITH, CAF\'c9 JUANITA (SEATTLE)\par
Dishes\par
Spring Pea Fricass\'e9e with Morels and Butter Lettuce \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, at\par
the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception Chilled Sweet Pea Soup \ldblquote\'e0 la\par
Fran\'e7aise\rdblquote  Thumbelina Carrot Salad with Cilantro and Lobster \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel\par
Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Pea Velout\'e9 with Apple-Smoked Bacon, Louisiana Crayfish, Savory Cream\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Daniel (New York City)\par
Garden Pea Soup with Morel Cream\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Sweet Pea Soup with Caramelized Vidalia Onion, Apple-Smoked Bacon,\par
and Mint \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York City)\par
Sweet Pea Sorbet with Preserved Green Almond and Marcona Almond\par
Milk, Fuji Apple with Butterscotch, Rye, and Thyme \f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter,\par
Charlie Trotter\rquote s (Chicago)\par
Fresh Pea Ravioli with Sweet Onions Sauce and Smoked Pork Reduction \f2\emdash\f1\par
David Waltuck, Chanterelle (New York City)\par
PECAN OIL (See Oil, Pecan)\par
PECANS (See also Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: bitter\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, cookies, pies)\par
bananas\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
breakfast (e.g., pancakes, waffles)\par
butter, unsalted\par
butterscotch\par
CARAMEL\par
cheese, goat\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
corn syrup: light, dark\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
dates\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream\par
kumquats\par
lemon, juice\par
liqueurs, orange\par
MAPLE SYRUP\par
mascarpone\par
Mexican sauces\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oats and oatmeal\par
orange\par
peaches\par
pears\par
persimmons\par
plums\par
pork\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rice, wild\par
rum\par
salads\par
salt\par
sour cream\par
Southern cuisine (American)\par
squash, butternut\par
stir-fried dishes\par
Dishes\par
Pecan Praline Cheesecake\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Terrance Brennan, Artisanal (New York City)\par
Pecan Praline Pancakes with Brown Butter Bananas and Rum Raisins \f2\emdash\f1\par
Daniel Humm, Eleven Madison Park (New York City)\par
Southern Butter Pecan Ice Cream with Hot Caramel Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick\par
O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia) Phyllo Spirals\par
with Garden Herbs, Rio Grande Organic Pecans, and Pure Luck Feta \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
We are using pecans on a savory dish of scallops and shrimp, ham, shiitake\par
mushrooms, shallots, and pecan-studded basmati rice.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
strawberries\par
stuffing\par
SUGAR: BROWN, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine: red, sweet\par
PEPPER, BLACK\par
Taste: pungent, hot\par
Function: warming\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Pepper suggests \ldblquote false heat\rdblquote  and also stimulates the appetite.\par
Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
apricots\par
basil\par
BEEF, esp. roasted\par
berries\par
cardamom\par
cheese\par
cherries\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
eggs\par
fruit, fresh\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
meats, red\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
parsley\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
poultry\par
pumpkin (e.g., pie)\par
rosemary\par
salads\par
SALT\par
sauces\par
sausages\par
seafood, heartier\par
soups\par
spice cake\par
STEAKS, esp. grilled\par
strawberries\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
veal\par
PEPPER, GREEN (as peppercorns)\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
The flavor is less sharp than black pepper.\par
avocados\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
brandy\par
butter\par
chicken\par
cream\par
curries\par
duck\par
game\par
garlic\par
ham\par
meats, esp. grilled and/or red\par
mustard\par
parsley\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pork\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
sauces: creamy, white\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
stock, veal\par
turkey\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
venison\par
wine, white\par
PEPPER, PINK\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
butter\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
desserts\par
duck\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fruit\par
game\par
lemongrass\par
lime leaves, kaffir\par
lobster\par
meats, esp. richer and/or stronger\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
parsley\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pears\par
pepper: black, green\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
poultry\par
salad dressings\par
sauces: fruit, white\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
steak\par
veal\par
vinegar, esp. balsamic\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
PEPPER, RED (See also Cayenne, Ground)\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
chili powder (ingredient)\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
jerk seasoning (ingredient)\par
meats\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mole negro (ingredient)\par
seafood\par
I like white pepper with most white fish, and black pepper with tuna and red\par
meat. White pepper works with halibut because it does not overwhelm the fish.\par
Black pepper has a complex flavor and is spicy, which can be distracting. The\par
problem with many peppers like cayenne or chipotle is that they are so strong\par
they can burn. That is not a problem for me, but it is for our clientele. We use\par
piment d\rquote Espelette, which is spicy but sweet.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
You have to be careful with black pepper because it can be a vehicle to add\par
flavor \f2\emdash\f1  but if misused, it will mask flavor. I might add the tiniest little pinch\par
before a dessert gets served to punch it up. I use black pepper with fresh fruit,\par
especially cherries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
To me, tuna doesn\rquote t even taste like tuna anymore unless it\rquote s seared with my\par
pepper mix of toasted and ground black and pink peppercorns, coriander, and\par
star anise. The same mix is also great on beef, buffalo, and venison.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
We don\rquote t have sixteen types of pepper here; we use a basic black Tellicherry\par
peppercorn and a little bit of red pepper flakes. I will occasionally go to an Asian\par
market to get a pepper that has a sweet element to it, as these also tend to have a\par
fruitiness to them that works well in braised dishes.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
PEPPER, WHITE\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate (Note: White pepper is \ldblquote quieter,\rdblquote  i.e., milder, than black\par
pepper.)\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
Asian cuisines\par
charcuterie\par
cloves\par
European cuisines\par
fish, esp. white\par
ginger\par
halibut\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lemongrass\par
nutmeg\par
potatoes\par
quatre \'e9pices (key ingredient)\par
sauces, esp. light-colored or white\par
soups, esp. light-colored or white\par
Thai cuisine\par
white and other light-colored foods\par
PEPPERS, BELL (See Bell Peppers)\par
PEPPERS, CHILE (See Chile Peppers)\par
PEPPERS, PEPPADEW\par
Peppadew peppers, which are from South Africa, started coming to the\par
U.S. just a few years ago. I stuff them with goat cheese and wrap them in\par
Serrano ham before frying them. You get sweetness and spice from the\par
peppers, saltiness from the ham, creaminess from the cheese, and\par
crunchiness from the frying. Doing so gives them so much flavor, I don\rquote t\par
need to add anything else.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
PEPPERS, PIQUILLO (Spanish peppers)\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: roast\par
aioli\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
beef\par
bread\par
calamari\par
CHEESE: goat, manchego\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chocolate, bitter\par
chorizo\par
clams\par
crab\par
eggs\par
fish, esp. cod, redfish, white\par
garlic\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
meat\par
mushrooms\par
Dishes\par
Green Olives Stuffed with Piquillo Peppers and Anchovies \f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9\par
ANDR\'c9S, Caf\'e9 Atl\'e1ntico (Washington, DC)\par
Piquillo Peppers Filled with Manchego Cheese, Avocado Leaf \f2\emdash\f1  and Hoja\par
Santa \f2\emdash\f1  Seasoned Refried Beans and Vanilla \f2\emdash\f1  Bitter Chocolate Sauce \f2\emdash\f1\par
Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives\par
onions\par
orange\par
paprika, smoked\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salt\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
Spanish cuisine\par
stews\par
sugar\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
PEPPERS, SPANISH\par
Guindilla peppers are used to give heat in Spanish cooking. If you were\par
cooking beans, you would add your parsley sprig, half an onion, garlic,\par
carrot, and one guindilla pepper. Nora peppers are smoked, bell-shaped\par
peppers from Catalonia used for romesco sauce. They are similar to\par
Mexican guajillo peppers. Chorizero peppers are bittersweet. Their pulp is\par
used in salsa vizcaina, which is a red sauce made with a lot of onions\par
cooked down sweet, the chorizero pepper pulp, and either fish or bean\par
stock. It\rquote s great served on fish or tripe.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
PERSIMMONS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 sour\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, broil, raw\par
almonds\par
apples\par
avocados\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
caramel\par
cashews\par
cheese, esp. creamy, goat\par
chile peppers, serrano\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
cream and ice cream\par
custard\par
endive\par
fris\'e9e\par
ginger\par
grapes, esp. red\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
kiwi\par
kumquats\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, esp. orange\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
oil, hazelnut\par
olive oil\par
orange\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pomegranates\par
pork\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
Because of the texture and unique flavor of a persimmon, no matter what you\par
do it will always taste like persimmon pudding. I decided two years ago to stop\par
trying to do anything else with persimmons. Why try and reinvent the wheel? To\par
work with persimmons, you first put them in the freezer overnight to ripen, then\par
peel and puree them. Persimmons are pretty astringent, so you need to add a lot\par
of spices and sugar to them. The combination of allspice, cinnamon, and ginger\par
that you see in traditional recipes is nice with persimmons, and adds an\par
interesting complexity to the flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
puddings\par
radicchio\par
raisins\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salads: fruit, green\par
salt\par
seafood\par
sorbet\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine, sweet (e.g., Sauternes)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
persimmons + allspice + cinnamon + ginger\par
PHEASANT\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: grill, roast\par
Tips: Wrap with bacon to keep from drying out when roasting.\par
Dishes\par
Pheasant: Cider, Shallot, and Burning Leaves \f2\emdash\f1  Grant Achatz, Alinea\par
(Chicago)\par
Cinnamon-Roasted Pheasant with Applewood-Smoked Bacon and Red\par
Chile Pecan Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Robert Del Grande, Caf\'e9 Annie (Houston)\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
cabbage, esp. savoy\par
Calvados\par
chestnuts\par
cider\par
cinnamon\par
cream: heavy, sour\par
foie gras\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
GARLIC\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lemon, juice\par
mushrooms, esp. wild\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
port\par
POTATOES\par
raisins\par
sage\par
sauerkraut\par
shallots\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. southern\par
squash, winter\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
truffles\par
wild rice\par
wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pheasant + apples + potatoes\par
PICKLES\par
I lived in Japan for two years where I fell in love with pickles and pickling. For\par
pickling, I use the proportions that are common for seasoning Japanese sushi\par
rice, though I\rquote ll admit that there might be a sushi chef out there who might\par
disagree with me: 9 parts vinegar to 5 parts sugar, 1 part salt, and 1 part water.\par
Pickles are one of those things I love to have in my pantry because they are so\par
fun to use and make so many things yummy. It is definitely one of my tricks that\par
I keep stashed away. I like to pickle Swiss chard stems with raw beets and star\par
anise. They are great together and work as a garnish on our Nantucket Bay\par
scallop dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
PIMENTON (See also Paprika)\par
I don\rquote t even like to use the word \ldblquote paprika\rdblquote  when referring to pimenton. It is not\par
the same as Hungarian paprika, which is just dried pepper and doesn\rquote t taste like\par
anything else. The Spanish were the first to plant peppers. Our pimenton has the\par
right touch of sweetness, bitterness, and smoke. Used in a dish it makes the dish\par
a whole new thing. Sprinkled on octopus, it is astonishing.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Pineapple-Vanilla Vacherin with Coconut Gel\'e9e \f2\emdash\f1  Daniel Boulud, Restaurant\par
Daniel, New York City\par
Warm Pineapple Cake \ldblquote Sottosopra\rdblquote  with Rum Zabaione \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma,\par
pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Exotic Fruit and Mint Salad, Star Anise Tuile \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby,\par
Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Pineapple Rum Soup with Passion Fruit and Mango Gel\'e9e, Coconut\par
Tapioca, Pink Peppercorn\f2\endash\f1 Pineapple Sorbet \f2\emdash\f1  Gale Gand, pastry chef, Tru\par
(Chicago)\par
Pineapple Sorbet, Candied Pine Nut Tart, and Pineapple Chip \f2\emdash\f1  Thomas\par
Keller, The French Laundry (Yountville, California) Fermented Pineapple Peel\par
Drink\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Grilled Pineapple, Avocado, and Watercress \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra\par
(Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Roasted Pineapple with Pistachio Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin\par
(New York City)\par
PINEAPPLES\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, poach, raw, roast, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
apricots\par
avocado\par
baked goods\par
BANANAS\par
basil\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cashews\par
cayenne\par
cheese: blue (some)\par
chicken\par
Pineapple is 80 to 90 percent water. We\rquote ll freeze the pineapple, then pull it out\par
and put it in a colander, and let the juice run out of it \f2\emdash\f1  which has all the flavor\par
of the pineapple. After pressing out all the juice, we\rquote ll throw out the now-\par
flavorless pulp, and use just the juice. You can do the same with strawberries or\par
other fruits to obtain a clear juice, which you can use in drinks or, frozen and\par
scraped, as fruit crystals to serve with a dessert.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE AND CINDY DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
I like the combination of rosemary with pineapple.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Pineapple benefits from a touch of vanilla.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
chile peppers: fresh, dried, red, green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chocolate\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
COCONUT: meat, milk\par
cognac\par
Cointreau\par
cream and ice cream\par
cream, Bavarian style\par
curry\par
fennel seeds\par
fruits, tropical\par
ginger\par
Grand Marnier\par
grapefruit\par
ham\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
LIME: juice, zest\par
macadamia nuts\par
MANGOES\par
maple syrup\par
marinades\par
meat\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
onion, red\par
oranges: fruit, marmalade\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
pepper, black\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
poultry\par
raspberries\par
rice/rice pudding\par
rosemary\par
RUM\par
saffron\par
salads, fruit\par
salt, esp. fleur de sel, kosher\par
seafood (e.g., shrimp)\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
Szechuan pepper\par
tamarind\par
tapioca\par
VANILLA\par
vinegar, rice\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine, sweet (e.g., Vin Santo)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pineapple + avocado + watercress\par
pineapple + banana + ginger + rum + sugar + vanilla\par
pineapple + berries + citrus + mangoes + star anise\par
pineapple + coconut + honey + oranges\par
pineapple + ice cream + brown sugar + vanilla\par
pineapple + lime + sugar\par
pineapple + Madeira + brown sugar + vanilla\par
pineapple + rum + sugar\par
pineapple + rum + vanilla + walnuts\par
You have to be careful with pine nuts because they are so strong that they will\par
dominate a dessert. If I use even a small amount in an apple dessert, it turns it\par
into a pine nut dessert.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Pine nuts are really fatty and luxurious, so I like to use salt with them for\par
balance. Even in a pesto, you notice the flavor of pine nuts versus using walnuts\par
or no nuts.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
PINE NUTS\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: toast\par
apples\par
apricots\par
basil\par
bell peppers\par
Central American cuisine\par
cheese: feta, goat, Parmesan, ricotta\par
cookies\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
garlic\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lemon\par
liqueurs, orange\par
mascarpone\par
Mexican sauces\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange\par
pears\par
PESTO (key ingredient)\par
prunes\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
rum\par
sauces\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. southern\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, esp. roasted\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pine nuts + apples + apricots + rosemary\par
pine nuts + basil + garlic + olive oil + Parmesan cheese (pesto)\par
PINOT NOIR\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
beef\par
chicken\par
duck\par
lamb\par
mushrooms\par
pork\par
salmon\par
tuna\par
veal\par
PIQUANCY\par
Taste: hot\par
Volume: loud\par
Function: warming\par
Tips: Stimulates appetite; enhances other flavors (e.g., salty, sour).\par
cayenne\par
chile peppers\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
horseradish\par
mustard, hot\par
onions, esp. raw\par
pepper, black\par
red pepper flakes\par
spices, many\par
wasabi\par
PISTACHIO OIL (See Oil, Pistachio)\par
PISTACHIOS (See also Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: year-round\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, roast, salt\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
apricots\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bananas\par
basil\par
beets\par
cardamom\par
cauliflower\par
cheese: goat, Parmesan, ricotta, Taleggio\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
coconut\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
Heat [aka piquancy] can come from a grind of black pepper when you are\par
cooking, or at the last second on top of a salad before it goes out. Heat can also\par
come from some jalape\'f1o in steamed cockles with ginger and lemongrass. In\par
either case, heat adds a brightness to the dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Dishes\par
Pistachio and Chocolate Semifreddo\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
A Checkerboard Terrine of Pistachio and White Chocolate Ice Cream with\par
Blackberry Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington\par
(Washington, Virginia) Pistachios are a distinctively flavored nut. You need to\par
be sure that what you pair with them will stand up. They go well with raspberries\par
but not strawberries because the latter are softer in flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Pistachios look great with other nuts because you get green and brown alongside\par
each other. They can be pretty mild so they are less about flavor and more about\par
color and texture. Since pistachios are so mild I like to feature them solo or in a\par
large quantity so they don\rquote t get lost. I make a chocolate semifreddo and there is\par
pistachio in the semifreddo, there is pistachio paste, they are on the plate, and\par
they are in the sauce. They are front and center.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
dates\par
duck\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
endive\par
figs: dried, fresh\par
foie gras\par
ginger\par
gooseberries\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
kumquats\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
lemon\par
mangoes\par
mascarpone\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nectarines\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
pastries\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
PEACHES\par
poultry\par
prunes\par
quince\par
raisins, esp. golden\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
rose water\par
sausages\par
sugar\par
vanilla\par
watermelon\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
strawberries, which pistachios can easily overpower\par
PLANTAINS, GREEN\par
Botanical relatives: bananas\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, deep-fry, mash, saut\'e9\par
Tips: Look for green plantains without any yellow.\par
African cuisine\par
bacon\par
butter\par
cardamom\par
Central American cuisine\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curry\par
fruits, tropical\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lime, juice\par
Mexican cuisine\par
molasses\par
oil: canola, vegetable\par
onions, esp. red\par
pepper, esp. black\par
pork\par
rice\par
salsa\par
salt, esp. kosher\par
soups\par
stews\par
yogurt\par
PLANTAINS, SWEET\par
Taste: sweet\par
Botanical relatives: bananas\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, deep-fry, saut\'e9\par
Tip: Look for yellow to black plantains that ripen to black.\par
African cuisine\par
allspice\par
butter\par
Central American cuisine\par
chicken\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
fruits, tropical\par
ginger\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
Mexican cuisine\par
molasses\par
oil: canola, vegetable\par
orange: fruit, juice, zest\par
pepper, black\par
rice\par
rum, esp. dark\par
salt\par
star anise\par
sugar, esp. brown\par
toffee\par
PLUMS\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, poach, raw, stew\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise\par
anise hyssop\par
apricots, pureed\par
arugula\par
bay leaf\par
brandy, esp. plum\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cherries\par
cider\par
CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cornmeal\par
cream and ice cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
custard\par
French cuisine\par
gin\par
ginger\par
Dishes\par
Plum and Bay Leaf Soup with Vanilla Yogurt Sorbetto \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma,\par
pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Plum Cornmeal Cake with Plum Sorbet\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
juniper berries\par
Kirsch\par
lavender\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
liqueurs: almond, orange, plum\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
olive oil\par
onions, red\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
peaches\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
prosciutto\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rum, dark\par
sage\par
salads\par
sour cream\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, confectioners\rquote , white\par
thyme\par
VANILLA\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine, dry red or white or dessert\par
wine: port or sweet (e.g., plum)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
plums + arugula + prosciutto\par
plums + bay leaf + vanilla\par
plums + cinnamon + cloves + red wine + sugar\par
plums + cinnamon + orange\par
plums + cream + sugar + vanilla\par
plums + ginger + raspberries\par
plums + ginger + yogurt\par
PLUMS, DRIED (aka prunes)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, stew\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
*ARMAGNAC\par
bacon\par
baked goods\par
bay leaf\par
brandy, esp. apple, pear\par
caramel\par
cheese, esp. blue, goat, ricotta\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
cream and ice cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
I like plums with anise hyssop. That is a classic flavor combination and I serve it\par
every year. They also work well with sage, and I have made sage ice cream to\par
serve with plums.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
cumin\par
currants\par
custard\par
dates\par
figs, esp. dried\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
game birds\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey, wildflower\par
lemon, zest\par
liqueurs: almond, other nut\par
macadamia nuts\par
maple syrup\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
oatmeal\par
orange, zest\par
p\'e2t\'e9\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
pork\par
port, esp. tawny\par
quince\par
rabbit\par
raisins\par
rice pudding\par
rum\par
Southern Comfort\par
star anise\par
stews\par
sugar: brown, white\par
teas, esp. black or Earl Grey\par
thyme\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: champagne, white wine\par
WALNUTS\par
whiskey\par
WINE: dry red (e.g., Bordeaux, Cabernet Sauvignon), Sauternes, sweet\par
white (e.g., Muscat)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
prunes + allspice + bay leaf + cinnamon + black pepper\par
prunes + apples + brandy + vanilla + yogurt\par
prunes + Armagnac + chocolate\par
prunes + Armagnac + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
prunes + brandy + cream + vanilla\par
prunes + cheese + cumin + walnuts\par
prunes + cognac + honey + Sauternes\par
POLENTA\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: simmer\par
Tips: Grill or saut\'e9 cooked polenta.\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
butter, unsalted\par
CHEESE: Fontina, Gorgonzola, Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, Parmesan,\par
Taleggio\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cream / milk\par
egg, yolks\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
herbs\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine, esp. northern\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
mushrooms, esp. chanterelles, porcini, shiitakes\par
oil: truffle, walnut\par
olive oil\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
Dishes\par
Cornish Game Hens with Pomegranate Sauce and Toasted Almonds \f2\emdash\f1\par
Rafih Benjelloun, Imperial Fez (Atlanta)\par
Pomegranate Glazed Specialty Chicken Breast with Coconut-Onion Curry\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
pork\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sausages\par
scallions\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
truffles, white\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
polenta + chanterelle mushrooms + white truffle oil\par
polenta + Gorgonzola cheese + mascarpone + walnuts\par
polenta + Parmesan cheese + rosemary\par
POMEGRANATES\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, ice/sorbet\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
arugula\par
avocados\par
bananas\par
beets\par
cardamom\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cream\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry\par
desserts\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger, esp. fresh\par
grapefruit\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
hummus\par
kumquat\par
lamb\par
legumes\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
meats, roasted\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
parsley\par
pine nuts\par
pomegranate molasses (key ingredient)\par
pork\par
poultry (e.g., turkey)\par
SALADS, esp. cucumber, fruit, green\par
sesame seeds\par
sorbets\par
stewed dishes\par
sugar\par
tequila\par
turmeric\par
What is nice about pomegranates is that they are very flavorful but don\rquote t have a\par
lot of sugar in them. They also have a unique flavor that is not like anything else.\par
It is one of the few flavors that have come around in popularity because they\par
have made it easier to use [via pomegranate juice, molasses, etc.]. Cleaning them\par
to use just the seeds can be a pain in the neck. However, I use the juice because it\par
makes a great sorbet.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine\par
walnuts\par
wine: port, red, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pomegranates + almonds + cinnamon + cloves + garlic + ginger + honey\par
pomegranates + chicken + coconut + curry + onions\par
pomegranates + lemon + sugar\par
POMEGRANATE MOLASSES\par
Taste: sweet, sour\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
allspice\par
beef\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
duck\par
game\par
game birds\par
ginger\par
lamb\par
marinades\par
meats\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Pomelo is good in salads. During the summer, we will mix it with pickled ginger\par
and a couple of other ingredients and serve it on chicken or fish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
mustard\par
mustard seeds\par
olive oil\par
pepper\par
pork\par
poultry\par
salad dressings\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
POMELOS (See also Grapefruit)\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: broil, raw\par
avocado\par
chicken\par
chili powder\par
coconut\par
crab\par
fish\par
fish sauce\par
ginger, pickled\par
lemongrass\par
maple\par
onions\par
peanuts\par
pomegranate\par
salads\par
salt\par
scallops\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pomelo + pickled ginger + fish\par
pomelo + salt + chili powder\par
PONZU SAUCE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
beef\par
dashi\par
fish, esp. grilled or raw\par
Japanese cuisine\par
meat, esp. grilled\par
sashimi\par
shellfish\par
soy sauce\par
ume (Japanese plum)\par
POPPY SEEDS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
apples\par
Asian cuisine\par
BAKED GOODS (e.g., breads, cakes, cookies, pastries)\par
beans, green\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
cheese, ricotta\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cream\par
curry powder\par
desserts\par
eggplant\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
fish\par
fruits\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
lemon\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
noodles\par
nutmeg\par
onions, esp. sweet\par
pasta\par
pastries\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
salads and salad dressings, esp. creamy\par
sauces, esp. creamy\par
sesame seeds\par
sour cream\par
spinach\par
strawberries\par
sugar\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vanilla\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
zucchini\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Techniques: Use dry-heat cooking (e.g., broil, grill, roast) for tender cuts of\par
pork, and moist-heat cooking (e.g., braise, stew) for tougher cuts of pork.\par
aioli\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
anise\par
APPLES: cider, fruit, juice\par
apricots\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
barbecue dishes\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: green, navy, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage: green, red\par
Calvados\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese: Gruy\'e8re, Jack\par
chile peppers, esp. anchos, dried red, jalape\'f1o\par
chili powder\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cider\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cornichons\par
corn\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
figs\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
French cuisine, esp. southern\par
fruit: dried, fresh\par
GARLIC\par
ginger: fresh, ground dried\par
ham, Serrano\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
ketchup\par
Korean cuisine, esp. northern\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mace\par
mangoes: green, ripe\par
marjoram\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
Dishes\par
Rack of Pork, Marinated in Oranges, Thyme, and Garlic, Served with\par
Fennel and Black Olive Ouzo and Orange Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Ann Cashion, Cashion\rquote s\par
Eat Place (Washington, DC)\par
Suckling Pig with Quince Paste and Romesco Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Suzanne Goin, at the\par
2003 James Beard Awards gala reception Roasted Rack of Pork with Apple\par
Butter Glaze, Country Ham Spoon Bread, Roasted Apples, Mustard\par
Greens, and Bourbon Glaze \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Kinkead, Colvin Run (Vienna, Virginia)\par
Beer-Braised Pork Belly with Sauerkraut and Ginger Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel\par
Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
Organic Berkshire Pork Tenderloin Marinated in Wheat Beer with Barley\par
Risotto, Turnips, and Chicory Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern\par
(New York City)\par
Pork with Fig Maple Jus and Dutch Cabbage \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia\par
(Houston)\par
Cuban Roast Pork Marinated in an Allspice-Cumin Adobo with Ripe\par
Plantains, Rich Oaxacan Six-Chile Mole Sauce, and \ldblquote Moors and\par
Christians\rdblquote  Rice \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
Trio of Pan-Seared Pork Tenderloin with House-Made Sausage and Potato\par
Pierogis \f2\emdash\f1  Celina Tio, American Restaurant (Kansas City)\par
Marinated Pork Medallions with Garlic-Yogurt Curry and Naan Bread \f2\emdash\f1\par
Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
You\rquote ll often see what is essentially clam chowder [without the clams] used as a\par
sauce: the combination of pork \f2\emdash\f1  whether it\rquote s bacon, chorizo, or whatever \f2\emdash\f1\par
and thyme, served with potatoes and cream. It could be served with something\par
poached or saut\'e9ed. It is a cute reworking of something that is classic.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I like the combination of pork with fruit. With a pork chop, fresh and dried figs\par
or strawberries would all work.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MARCEL DESAULNIERS, THE TRELLIS (WILLIAMSBURG, VIRGINIA)\par
Sauces often don\rquote t do justice to the meat they\rquote re saucing. For that reason, we\par
don\rquote t use veal stock with pork, which hides the flavor of the meat. Instead, we\par
want to do everything we can to emphasize the flavor of the pork itself. So, we\rquote ll\par
roast the pork scraps and bones and make a pork stock instead. In the\par
summertime, to keep it light, we won\rquote t even add wine.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAN BARBER, BLUE HILL AT STONE BARNS (POCANTICO HILLS,\par
NEW YORK)\par
mirepoix\par
molasses\par
mushrooms, esp. shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard seeds\par
noodles/pasta\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
ONIONS, esp. green, pearl, red, sweet, white, yellow\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
paprika: smoked, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts and peanut sauce\par
pears\par
peas, black-eyed\par
pecans\par
*PEPPER: black, white\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
piquillo peppers\par
plums\par
port\par
potatoes, mashed or roasted\par
prosciutto\par
prunes\par
quince\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice or risotto\par
ROSEMARY\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sauerkraut\par
shallots\par
sherry, cream\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spaetzle\par
Spanish cuisine, esp. southern\par
squash: acorn, butternut\par
star anise\par
stock, chicken\par
Pork can handle all the sweet spices, including allspice, cinnamon, and clove.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN\par
(SCOTTSDALE, ARIZONA)\par
sugar (pinch)\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tangerine, juice\par
tea, black (e.g., Lapsang Souchong)\par
THYME\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
verjus\par
vermouth, dry\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine: dry red, white\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pork + allspice + mace\par
pork + apples + mustard\par
pork + bacon + mustard + sauerkraut\par
pork + chile peppers + cilantro + garlic + lime + peanuts\par
pork + cinnamon + star anise\par
pork + coriander + honey + soy sauce\par
pork + clove + garlic + orange\par
pork + cream + potatoes + thyme\par
pork + curry + garlic + yogurt\par
pork + fennel + garlic\par
pork + garlic + ginger + molasses\par
pork + ginger + honey + soy sauce\par
pork + mustard + sauerkraut\par
pork + port + rosemary\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  BACON (See Bacon)\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  BELLY\par
Techniques: braise, double-cook, pan-fry\par
apples\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
caraway\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cumin\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
mushrooms\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
sake\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, veal\par
thyme\par
vegetables, root\par
vinegar, champagne\par
zucchini\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  CHOPS\par
Techniques: dry-heat cooking (e.g., broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9)\par
APPLES: cider, fruit, sauce\par
arugula\par
beans\par
bread crumbs\par
broccoli rabe\par
butter\par
cabbage, red\par
coriander\par
corn\par
fennel\par
fennel pollen\par
I\rquote m sometimes inspired by looking back to my childhood and the combinations\par
of flavors I liked. I was a pretty picky eater growing up, but I loved my macaroni\par
and cheese, and bacon and eggs. I came up with a take on bacon and eggs\par
substituting pork belly for the bacon. I love pork belly \f2\emdash\f1  it is a poor man\rquote s foie\par
gras, the way it just melts in your mouth. I make the eggs in a double boiler that\par
gives them a creamy texture, and finish them with fresh herbs. For the belly, we\par
grill it and then braise it in citrus, champagne vinegar, and veal stock for six\par
hours. Then at serving, we grill it again and top it with a \ldblquote sweet heat\rdblquote  sauce\par
which is like a barbecue sauce with layers and layers of flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
Dishes\par
Grilled Pork Chop with Artichokes, Cipollini, and Aceto Manodori \f2\emdash\f1\par
Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Pork Chop, Creamed Sweet Corn, Pan-Fried Summer Squash, and Crushed\par
Blackberries \f2\emdash\f1  Cory Schreiber, Wildwood (Portland, Oregon)\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens\par
honey\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
molasses\par
mustard (esp. Dijon) and mustard seeds\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
peaches\par
pepper, black\par
polenta\par
potatoes: mashed, steamed\par
prosciutto\par
rosemary\par
SAGE\par
sauerkraut\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pork chop + apples + ginger + sage\par
pork chop + arugula + tomatoes\par
pork chop + greens + sweet potatoes\par
pork chop + peaches + balsamic vinegar\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  HAM (See Ham)\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  LOIN\par
Techniques: dry-heat cooking (e.g., bake, braise, grill, roast, saut\'e9)\par
bay leaf\par
brandy\par
cabbage, red\par
chile peppers, ancho\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
figs\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
maple syrup\par
mustard\par
mustard seeds\par
onions\par
oregano\par
port\par
potatoes\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
sake\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme\par
vinegar, white\par
wine, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pork loin + figs + onions\par
pork loin + red cabbage + port wine\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  RIBS\par
Techniques: bake, barbecue, braise, broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9\par
allspice\par
bay leaf\par
beer\par
bourbon\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
chile peppers, guajillo\par
chili powder\par
cider\par
coffee\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hoisin sauce\par
honey\par
hot sauce\par
ketchup\par
lemongrass\par
liquid smoke\par
mirepoix\par
molasses\par
mustard, Dijon\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. white\par
oregano\par
paprika: hot, smoked\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sesame oil\par
soy sauce\par
sugar, brown\par
Tabasco sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato puree\par
vinegar: apple cider, balsamic, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  SAUSAGE (See Sausages)\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  SHOULDER\par
Techniques: moist-heat cooking (e.g., barbecue, braise, stew)\par
achiote\par
allspice\par
andouille sausage (key ingredient)\par
apples\par
barbecue sauce\par
bay leaf\par
cayenne\par
chile peppers\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
cornmeal (e.g., grits, polenta)\par
couscous\par
cumin\par
five-spice powder\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime\par
maple syrup\par
milk\par
mushrooms\par
orange\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
port\par
quince\par
rice\par
rum\par
sage\par
soy sauce\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar\par
wine, red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pork shoulder + bay leaves + wild mushrooms\par
pork shoulder + chipotle peppers + cumin + tomatoes\par
pork shoulder + plantains + rice + rum\par
PORK \f2\emdash\f1  TENDERLOIN\par
Techniques: dry-heat cooking (e.g., broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9)\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
bacon\par
beans, green\par
cardamom\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
corn\par
fennel\par
ginger\par
lime\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mushrooms, porcini, dried\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
onions: cipollini, yellow\par
orange\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. dark\par
sage\par
savory\par
sherry\par
sour cream\par
sugar, brown\par
tarragon\par
turmeric\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
yogurt\par
PORTUGUESE CUISINE\par
anise\par
bread\par
chile peppers, piri piri\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
clams\par
cod\par
custards\par
eggs\par
fish\par
garlic\par
kale\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pork, esp. cured\par
port\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
saffron\par
shellfish\par
tomatoes\par
turkey\par
vanilla\par
Flavor Affinities\par
clams + garlic + paprika + pork\par
cod + eggs + onions + potatoes\par
garlic + kale + onions + potatoes\par
piri piri peppers + garlic + lemon juice + olive oil + salt\par
POTATOES\par
Season: year-round\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, boil, deep-fry, gratin, grill, mash (use older, starchier\par
potatoes), puree, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
basil\par
BAY LEAF\par
BEEF\par
bell peppers, green, esp. roasted\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cauliflower (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
CHEESE: Brin d\rquote Amour, Cantal, cheddar, Comt\'e9, Dry Jack, Emmental,\par
Fontina, goat, Gouda, Gruy\'e8re, manchego, Parmesan, pecorino, raclette,\par
Roquefort, Torta del Casar\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chickpeas (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
chicory\par
chile peppers (e.g., Indian, Thai cuisine)\par
chili oil\par
CHIVES\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
CREAM / MILK\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggs\par
French cuisine\par
garam masala\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
greens, winter\par
herbs\par
kale\par
We make a potato stew with bacon, olives, mushrooms, and onions, which is\par
perfect for cold winter Sunday suppers. We add two strong flavors \f2\emdash\f1  bacon and\par
olives \f2\emdash\f1  to the potato. Onions and porcini mushrooms add another layer of\par
flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
LEEKS\par
lemon, juice\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
morels\par
mushrooms, esp. wild\par
mussels\par
mustard: Dijon, dry\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, e.g., black\par
ONIONS: green, red, Spanish, Vidalia\par
oysters\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pork and pork belly\par
ramps\par
ROSEMARY\par
rutabagas\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
salt cod\par
sausages: chorizo, Italian\par
savory\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
spinach (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
squash, winter (e.g., butternut)\par
STEAK\par
STOCKS: chicken, vegetable\par
sweet potatoes\par
THYME\par
tomatoes\par
truffles, black\par
turmeric\par
turnips\par
vegetables, root\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: champagne, sherry, white wine\par
wine, dry white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
potatoes + bacon + cheese + onions\par
potatoes + chives + sour cream\par
potatoes + cream + garlic + Parmesan cheese + rosemary\par
potatoes + cream + leeks + oysters\par
potatoes + Gruy\'e8re cheese + winter squash\par
potatoes + leeks + nutmeg\par
POTATOES, NEW\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: boil, roast, steam\par
Tips: New potatoes are best not baked or fried.\par
chives\par
cream\par
garlic\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
rosemary\par
salt\par
savory\par
shallots\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
vinegar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
new potatoes + garlic + shallots + tarragon + vinegar\par
POULTRY (See Chicken, Turkey, etc.)\par
PROSCIUTTO\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium (depending on thinness of slicing)\par
Volume: moderate\par
almonds\par
apples\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
cheese: Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, provolone\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chicory\par
cilantro\par
fennel\par
FIGS\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
*MELON, esp. cantaloupe, honeydew\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
mustard seeds\par
nectarines\par
olive oil\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
Dishes\par
Prosciutto San Daniele with Black Pepper Fettunta and Figs \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali,\par
Babbo (New York City)\par
Fig and Prosciutto Pizza\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Todd English, Figs (Charlestown, Massachusetts)\par
pomegranate molasses\par
sage\par
spinach\par
tomatoes\par
walnuts\par
PRUNES (See Plums, Dried)\par
PUMPKIN (See also Squashes, Winter)\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, grill, puree, roast\par
allspice\par
amaretti cookie crumbs\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
brandy, esp. apple\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
CHEESE: feta, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chile peppers\par
chocolate, white\par
cilantro\par
CINNAMON\par
CLOVES\par
coconut\par
cognac\par
cranberries\par
CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
Dishes\par
Pumpkin, Brown Sugar, and Tempura with Cinnamon Fragrance \f2\emdash\f1  Grant\par
Achatz, Alinea (Chicago)\par
Pumpkin \ldblquote Lune\rdblquote  with Butter, Sage, and Amaretti \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali, Babbo\par
(New York City)\par
Creamy Pumpkin and Cream Cheese Custard with Orange-Rum Raisins \f2\emdash\f1\par
Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Grilled Pineapple and Caribbean Pumpkin Salad with Pumpkin Seeds and\par
Cacao Nib Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Maricel Presilla, Zafra (Hoboken, New Jersey)\par
cumin\par
curry\par
custard\par
duck\par
garlic\par
GINGER: fresh, ground\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
kumquats\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
molasses\par
mushrooms\par
NUTMEG\par
nuts\par
oatmeal\par
oil: sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions: red, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
orange liqueur (e.g., Grand Marnier)\par
oysters\par
pasta (e.g., ravioli, tortelli)\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
pumpkin: oil, seeds\par
radicchio\par
raisins\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
rum, esp. dark\par
SAGE\par
salt, kosher\par
scallops\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
With pumpkin or even sweet potatoes, the combination of allspice, cinnamon,\par
ginger, and clove works great. If you buy canned pumpkin that has spices\par
already added, it tastes a little off and artificial. Depending on how you like your\par
spices, you typically add equal amounts of ginger and cinnamon and less allspice\par
and clove because the last two are very strong.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
Pumpkin and butternut squash juices are great in dishes featuring [each\par
respective vegetable]. What the juice does is intensify their flavor, making the\par
dishes taste more natural.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I had to come up with a recipe for a vegan cookbook, and ended up making a\par
pumpkin and coconut milk custard thickened with agar-agar that was so\par
delicious, I put it on the menu!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
Pumpkin and bay leaf together make the pumpkin taste even more pumpkinlike.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
My pumpkin pie soup dish was inspired by walking through Whole Foods and\par
seeing pumpkins. I thought, How do I like my pumpkin? I like pumpkin pie, and\par
thought it would actually make an interesting soup. I made a pumpkin soup and\par
found the soup to be very savory with its spicing, and added smoked duck to it. I\par
wanted a contrasting flavor, so I added some sweet meringue as a garnish. Then I\par
needed a contrast to the creaminess, so I put in a piece of pie crust a second\par
before serving as well as toasted pecans for even more crunch.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BOB IACOVONE, CUV\'c9E (NEW ORLEANS)\par
stews\par
stock, chicken\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
Thanksgiving\par
thyme\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
wine, sweet\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
pumpkin + allspice + bay leaf + cinnamon + salt\par
pumpkin + allspice + cinnamon + ginger\par
pumpkin + amaretti cookie crumbs + butter + pasta + sage\par
pumpkin + apples + curry\par
pumpkin + brown sugar + pine nuts\par
pumpkin + butter + garlic + chicken stock + thyme\par
pumpkin + chile peppers + garlic\par
pumpkin + cream cheese + orange + rum\par
pumpkin + cream cheese + pumpkin seeds + sugar\par
pumpkin + custard + garlic\par
pumpkin + honey + balsamic vinegar\par
pumpkin + olive oil + rosemary\par
Dishes\par
Pepitas: Toasted Pumpkin Seeds Seasoned with Cumin, Coriander, and\par
Jalape\'f1o \f2\emdash\f1  Traci Des Jardins, Mijita (San Francisco)\par
Cilantro and Pumpkin Seed Pesto\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Jerry Traunfeld, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
PUMPKIN SEED OIL (See Oil, Pumpkin Seed)\par
PUMPKIN SEEDS\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, roast\par
caramel\par
chile peppers, jalape\'f1o\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
Mexican cuisine\par
salt\par
PURSLANE\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, saut\'e9\par
beans, green\par
cucumber\par
garlic\par
herbs: chervil, cilantro, mint\par
olive oil\par
smoked trout\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, white wine\par
yogurt\par
QUAIL\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, pan roast, roast, saut\'e9\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
anisette\par
apples\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
Wild purslane has a lemony flavor and waxy leaves. It makes me think of a\par
salad of very young green beans that are three inches long and tossed with the\par
purslane and a splash of white wine vinegar and Ligurian olive oil.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
chard\par
chestnuts\par
chicken livers\par
chile peppers, esp. green\par
chili powder\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
currants\par
curries\par
dandelion greens\par
fennel\par
figs\par
foie gras\par
fris\'e9e\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh or ground\par
grapes, esp. seedless\par
ham\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
molasses\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, spring\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oysters\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper, black, pink\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
polenta\par
pomegranates and pomegranate molasses\par
potatoes, esp. creamer\par
prosciutto\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salsify\par
salt\par
sausage\par
Quail is too delicate for rosemary, so I like it with a little lavender, pink\par
peppercorns, and fleur de sel.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Dishes\par
Quail Corn Bread and Pecan Stuffed Breast, Leg Confit, Sweet Corn\par
Pudding, and Chanterelle Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Jeffrey Buben, Vidalia (Washington,\par
DC)\par
Glazed Quail with Caramelized Fennel Bulb and Tangerine Marmalade \f2\emdash\f1\par
Thomas Keller, The French Laundry (Yountville, California) Walnut-Glazed\par
Quail with a Ragout of Organic Shell Beans, Shiitake Mushrooms, and\par
Applewood-Smoked Bacon \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
Roast \ldblquote Brace\rdblquote  of Quail and La Quercia \ldblquote Americano\rdblquote  Prosciutto with a\par
\ldblquote Fondant\rdblquote  of Austrian Crescent Potatoes, Roasted Acorn Squash, Red\par
Pearl Onions, Swiss Chard, and Tarragon \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha\par
(Chicago)\par
Two Texas Cross Quail and Braised Cabbage with Apple and Hazelnuts \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Roasted Quail with Smoked Bacon, Brussels Sprouts, and a Quail Jus \f2\emdash\f1\par
Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Pan-Fried Coriander Quail Cakes with Coconut Curried Vegetables \f2\emdash\f1\par
Vikram Vij and Meeru Dhalwala, Vij\rquote s (Vancouver)\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
stuffing\par
sugar, brown\par
sumac\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
tomato paste\par
truffles, white\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine: red, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
quail + arugula + pomegranate\par
quail + bacon + Brussels sprouts\par
quail + bacon + garlic + lemon\par
quail + bourbon + molasses + pears\par
quail + chanterelle mushrooms + tarragon + tomato\par
quail + cinnamon + sumac\par
quail + figs + vinaigrette\par
quail + marjoram + olive oil + rosemary + sage + thyme\par
QUATRE \'c9PICES\par
beef, esp. braised\par
charcuterie\par
duck\par
foie gras\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
p\'e2t\'e9\par
sausages\par
soups\par
stews\par
vegetables\par
venison, esp. braised\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cloves (allspice or cinnamon) + ginger + nutmeg + black and/or white\par
pepper\par
QUINCE\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, poach, stew\par
almonds\par
*APPLES: fruit, juice\par
Armagnac\par
bay leaf\par
beef\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
Calvados\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
CHEESE, ESP. GOAT, MANCHEGO, RICOTTA, and esp. with quince\par
paste\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cranberries\par
cream and ice cream\par
custards\par
dates\par
figs, esp. dried\par
fruits, dried, esp. apricots, cherries, plums\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
jams and jellies\par
kumquats\par
lamb\par
lemon, juice\par
liqueurs, nut\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
nutmeg\par
Dishes\par
Roasted Quince, Foie Gras, and Candied Fennel with Sweet Spices \f2\emdash\f1  Grant\par
Achatz, Alinea (Chicago)\par
Quince and Marcona Almond \ldblquote Crisp,\rdblquote  Mascarpone Sorbet, and Pedro\par
Ximenez Sherry Caramel \f2\emdash\f1  Elizabeth Dahl, pastry chef, Naha (Chicago)\par
Quince-Filled Maple-Whiskey Cake with Goat Cheese Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1\par
Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Granny Smith Apple Sorbet, Quince, Quinoa, Pecans \f2\emdash\f1  Johnny Iuzzini,\par
pastry chef, Jean Georges (New York City) Quince is something that will never\par
be mainstream because of its unique flavor and the fact that you just can\rquote t peel it\par
and eat it. But if you peel quince and cook it forever and show it some love, it is\par
so much better than an apple or a pear.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
orange\par
*PEARS\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pies (e.g., apple)\par
pistachios\par
poultry\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
Spanish cuisine (quince paste)\par
star anise\par
sugar: brown, white\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine: red, sweet\par
wine, white, e.g., Riesling\par
yogurt\par
RABBIT (See also Game \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 astringent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: barbecue, braise (esp. legs, thighs), broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9,\par
stew\par
almonds\par
apples\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus, white\par
BACON, esp. smoked\par
barbecue sauce\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: fava, green, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage, esp. red\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery root\par
cherries\par
chervil\par
chiles, esp. Thai\par
chives\par
chocolate, esp. dark\par
cider\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
Dishes\par
Rabbit Enchiladas with Red Chile Mole and Pumpkin Seeds \f2\emdash\f1  Robert Del\par
Grande, at the 2003 James Beard Awards gala reception Braised Rabbit with\par
Winter Vegetables, Abita Beer Bread, Truffled Parsnips \f2\emdash\f1  Bob Iacovone,\par
Cuv\'e9e (New Orleans)\par
Roast Loin of Rabbit with a \ldblquote Rago\'fbt\rdblquote  of Braised Rabbit, Confit Garlic\par
Crushed Potatoes, Applewood Slab Bacon, \ldblquote Hen of the Woods\rdblquote\par
Mushrooms, Glazed Young Carrots, and Turnips \f2\emdash\f1  Carrie Nahabedian, Naha\par
(Chicago)\par
Roasted Rabbit Saddle with Root Vegetables, Green Lentils, and a Game\par
Jus \f2\emdash\f1  Thierry Rautureau, Rover\rquote s (Seattle)\par
Rabbit Braised in Arneis with Chickpea Crepe and Pancetta \f2\emdash\f1  Holly Smith,\par
Caf\'e9 Juanita (Seattle)\par
Rabbit Consomm\'e9, Morels, Pea, and Lavender Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto,\par
Tru (Chicago)\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cream\par
cumin\par
currants (e.g., currant jelly)\par
curry paste, Thai yellow\par
fennel leaves\par
fennel seeds\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lime: juice, leaves\par
Marsala\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms\par
MUSTARD: Dijon, dry\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, hazelnut, peanut, vegetable, walnut\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. green, black, kalamata\par
ONIONS, esp. pearl, Spanish, yellow\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
pancetta\par
paprika: smoked, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta/noodles, egg\par
PEPPER: black, pink, white\par
pine nuts\par
plums\par
port\par
potatoes\par
A dish I am really proud of is our saddle of rabbit served with green olives,\par
shallots, marjoram, and fennel jam. This is a light and beautifully balanced dish\par
that reminds me of Liguria [in Italy]. The olives are salty, the marjoram is strong,\par
and the fennel is sweet. This has been on our menu for over a year but it took me\par
a few tries to get right. I tried black olives, but they were too strong. I tried\par
rosemary, but it was too earthy. I tried Brussels sprouts, but they were a little too\par
bitter and didn\rquote t complement the same way sweet fennel did. So though the\par
combination didn\rquote t work for the saddle, the black olives and rosemary led me to\par
add some rabbit liver and stuff a whole boned rabbit. That dish did work. The\par
two dishes were different in the sense that the saddle with the green olives was a\par
little more sophisticated while the whole rabbit was more of a peasant dish.\par
Customers like both!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ODETTE FADA, SAN DOMENICO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
prunes\par
rice and risotto\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
STOCKS: chicken, rabbit, veal\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
vegetable puree\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
WINE: dry red, dry white (e.g., Riesling), Champagne\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rabbit + bacon + rosemary\par
rabbit + garlic + potatoes + rosemary + shallots\par
rabbit + mushrooms + noodles\par
rabbit + mushrooms + tarragon\par
rabbit + mustard + red wine\par
rabbit + vinegar + red wine\par
rabbit + rosemary + tomato\par
rabbit + shallots + white beans\par
RADICCHIO\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, grill, roast, sear\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
arugula\par
bacon\par
beans, esp. shell, white\par
beef\par
butter\par
capers\par
CHEESE, esp. pungent and/or Asiago, blue, dry Jack, feta, Gorgonzola,\par
Gruy\'e8re, PARMESAN\par
chicken, esp. roasted\par
chives\par
duck\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
endive\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fish\par
garlic\par
horseradish\par
ITALIAN CUISINE\par
lamb\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
mushrooms, wild\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil, corn\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions, red\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
pizza\par
pork\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
pumpkin and pumpkin oil\par
red pepper flakes\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salami\par
SALT\par
seafood, esp. grilled or roasted\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
squab\par
VINEGAR: BALSAMIC, red wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
radicchio + arugula + endive\par
radicchio + Asiago cheese + olive oil + balsamic vinegar\par
radicchio + duck + risotto + reduced balsamic vinegar\par
radicchio + fennel + prosciutto\par
radicchio + Gorgonzola cheese + pears\par
radicchio + hard-boiled eggs + olive oil + prosciutto + sherry vinegar +\par
walnuts\par
radicchio + mushrooms + risotto + balsamic vinegar\par
It\rquote s vital that you taste your ingredients to determine the best way to serve them.\par
We got a new radicchio in that is so bitter it just won\rquote t work as a salad. Instead,\par
we will turn it into a pesto or a tiny garnish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MONICA POPE, T\rquote AFIA (HOUSTON)\par
Dishes\par
Grilled Radicchio Trevisano with Asiago and Horseradish \f2\emdash\f1  Mario Batali,\par
Babbo (New York City)\par
Radicchio Salad with Parmesan Balsamic Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Hiro Sone and Lissa\par
Doumani, Terra (St. Helena, California) There is a time of year when all there\par
seems to be in the green market is radishes. You get sick of seeing them and\par
they are there for months. I needed to create something new and all there was\par
were radishes. So, I came up with a radish salad served with lobster. We blanch\par
turnip rounds and fold in a little baby ginger to get this wonderfully peppery\par
salad. The sauce with the lobster is a pistachio vinaigrette that is bound by onion\par
puree and brightened by the juice that pickled the ginger. We finish the dish with\par
toasted pistachios and add a pistachio oil. The pistachio nut and oil add an earthy\par
quality and depth of flavor to the dish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
RADISHES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, raw\par
anchovies\par
avocados\par
basil\par
bread: French, rye\par
BUTTER, esp. sweet\par
celery\par
cheese, esp. blue, feta\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
crab\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cucumbers\par
curry powder\par
dill\par
fennel\par
fish, esp. white\par
lemon, juice\par
lettuces\par
lobster\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange: fruit, juice\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper\par
rosemary\par
salads\par
SALT, esp. SEA\par
scallions\par
sesame oil\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
tamari\par
thyme\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR: cider, white wine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
radishes + bread + butter + salt\par
RAISINS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, raw, stew\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots, dried\par
baked goods (e.g., cookies)\par
bananas\par
brandy\par
breakfast (e.g., cereals, oatmeal)\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
cheese: goat, ricotta\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants\par
custard\par
dates\par
desserts\par
figs, dried\par
ginger\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ice cream\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine, esp. Venetian\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, nut\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
mole sauces\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oatmeal\par
orange: juice, zest\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
rice (e.g., pudding)\par
RUM\par
salads\par
sour cream\par
Southern Comfort\par
stuffings\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine: red, sweet, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
raisins + orange + rum\par
RAMPS (aka wild leeks; see also Leeks, Onions, and Scallions)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: cook, raw\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
butter\par
carrots\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cream\par
cured meats (e.g., speck)\par
fish (e.g., halibut, salmon, trout)\par
ham\par
lentils, green\par
mushrooms, wild (e.g., morels)\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
pork\par
potatoes, esp. new\par
prosciutto\par
risotto\par
shallots\par
stock, chicken\par
wine, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
ramps + asparagus + morels\par
ramps + lentils + pork\par
ramps + Parmesan cheese + risotto\par
ramps + pasta + speck\par
RASPBERRIES\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
beverages\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
brandy, esp. berry-flavored\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
Champagne\par
cheese: goat, ricotta\par
CHOCOLATE, ESP. DARK (say some)\par
*CHOCOLATE, WHITE\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
Dishes\par
Spaghetti with Local Ramps, American Speck, and Parmesan \f2\emdash\f1  Andrew\par
Carmellini, A Voce (New York City)\par
Roasted Pork Chop with Spiced Pulled Pork, Green Lentils, and Ramps \f2\emdash\f1\par
Gray Kunz, Caf\'e9 Gray (New York City)\par
Cointreau\par
corn syrup, light\par
CREAM\par
cr\'e8me anglaise\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants, esp. red\par
custard\par
desserts\par
figs, esp. fresh\par
Framboise\par
ginger\par
graham crackers\par
Grand Marnier\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
ICE CREAM, vanilla\par
jams\par
Kirsch\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, esp. berry, nut\par
macadamia nuts\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
melon\par
meringue\par
milk, sweetened condensed\par
mint (garnish)\par
nectarines\par
oatmeal\par
orange: juice, zest\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
quince\par
raspberry preserves\par
rhubarb\par
rum, dark\par
salads: fruit, green\par
Dishes\par
Flamb\'e9ed Peaches with Crepes and Raspberry-Lemon Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Gary\par
Danko, Gary Danko (San Francisco)\par
Raspberry Mousse and Star Anise Tuile\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Almond Tart Shell Filled with Rose Cream and Raspberries with Lychee\par
Granit\'e9, and Pistachio Cr\'e8me Anglaise \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry chef, Le\par
Bernardin (New York City) When working with raspberries, I will try not to\par
cook them too much. The problem is that often fresh raspberries are not that\par
great. If I am making a sauce, even in the middle of summer I will use frozen\par
raspberries. You can use frozen fruit as long as it doesn\rquote t have sugar or anything\par
else added. The fruit is picked in the field when it is ripe and frozen right away.\par
So, the frozen raspberries will have better flavor than those that have been put in\par
a little carton and shipped across the country. Of course, local farmers\rquote  market\par
raspberries are a different story. If I am making a sauce in the summer, the frozen\par
raspberries will taste great. On the other hand, you would not use frozen\par
raspberries on top of a tart.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  EMILY LUCHETTI, FARALLON (SAN FRANCISCO)\par
salt, sea\par
sauces\par
sour cream\par
star anise\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR: brown, white\par
tequila\par
wine: red, sweet (e.g., Riesling)\par
VANILLA\par
yogurt\par
AVOID\par
chocolate, dark (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
raspberries + almonds + lemon\par
raspberries + almonds + vanilla\par
raspberries + cream + star anise\par
raspberries + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + lemon\par
raspberries + custard + mint\par
raspberries + lemon + peaches\par
raspberries + sugar + vanilla + white chocolate\par
RED SNAPPER (See Snapper)\par
RHUBARB\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: bake, puree, saut\'e9, stew\par
almonds\par
ANGELICA\par
apples\par
bay leaf\par
berries\par
blood orange\par
brandy\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cheese: blue, Stilton\par
chives\par
chocolate, white\par
cinnamon\par
citrus fruits\par
cloves\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
custard\par
duck\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fish, mild\par
foie gras\par
fruit\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
GINGER: fresh, crystallized, powdered\par
Grand Marnier\par
grapefruit\par
grenadine\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Kirsch\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liver\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
oil, peanut\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
plums\par
pork\par
port\par
raspberries\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sour cream\par
*STRAWBERRIES\par
SUGAR: BROWN, CONFECTIONERS\rquote , WHITE\par
trout\par
Dishes\par
Cool Rhubarb Soup with Orange and Mint Fior Di Latte \f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma,\par
pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Ricotta Cheesecake with Rhubarb and Sweet Vanilla Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Gina\par
DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Rhubarb Stilton and Port Wine Reduction Chocolate \f2\emdash\f1  Dominique and\par
Cindy Duby, Wild Sweets (Vancouver)\par
Rhubarb Consomm\'e9, Vanilla-Poached Rhubarb, Strawberry Crisp \f2\emdash\f1  Gale\par
Gand, pastry chef, Tru (Chicago)\par
Vanilla Yogurt Mousse, Rhubarb-Citrus Compote, Blood Orange Sorbet,\par
and Coulis \f2\emdash\f1  Michael Laiskonis, pastry chef, Le Bernardin (New York City)\par
Warm Apple and Rhubarb Turnovers with Rhubarb-Gew\'fcrztraminer Jam\par
and Candied Ginger\f2\endash\f1 Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Emily Luchetti, pastry\par
chef, Farallon (San Francisco)\par
Rhubarb Napoleon with Mascarpone Cream and Fennel Compote \f2\emdash\f1  Ellie\par
Nelson, pastry chef, Jardini\'e8re (San Francisco)\par
Old-Fashioned Rhubarb Crisp with Cinnamon-Walnut Ice Cream \f2\emdash\f1\par
Michael Romano, Union Square Caf\'e9 (New York City)\par
Rhubarb and Angelica Pie\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Jerry Traunfeld, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
Rhubarb-Mint Cobbler\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Jerry Traunfeld, The Herbfarm (Woodinville, Washington)\par
I like to pair rhubarb, caramelized sugar, and blood orange juice \f2\emdash\f1  which has\par
more character than orange juice \f2\emdash\f1  because their seasons barely overlap. I am\par
not a fan of rhubarb desserts because they always tend to be one note \f2\emdash\f1  either\par
very tart, or very sweet to make up for the tartness. Caramel works well with\par
rhubarb because it makes the rhubarb not too sweet.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
There is not a lot of fruit available in the spring, so that pretty much leaves you\par
with rhubarb. The good news is that rhubarb works well in custards and ice\par
creams.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
VANILLA\par
verbena\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: cider, raspberry\par
wild rice\par
wine, sweet white (e.g., Riesling)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rhubarb + blood orange + caramelized sugar\par
rhubarb + caramel + orange\par
rhubarb + cardamom + orange\par
rhubarb + cardamom + sugar + vanilla\par
rhubarb + cinnamon + cream + walnuts\par
rhubarb + cream cheese + lime + vanilla\par
rhubarb + fennel + mascarpone\par
rhubarb + honey + lemon + vanilla\par
rhubarb + lemon + yogurt\par
rhubarb + mint + orange\par
rhubarb + mint + sugar + vanilla\par
rhubarb + Stilton cheese + port wine\par
rhubarb + strawberry + vanilla\par
RICE, WHITE \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: boil, steam\par
anise\par
bacon\par
beans\par
butter, unsalted\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
cream / milk\par
curry powder\par
fish\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
lemon, zest\par
meats\par
nuts: almonds, pecans, pistachios, walnuts\par
onions\par
peas\par
raisins\par
rhubarb\par
SAFFRON\par
salt\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
RICE, ARBORIO OR CARNAROLI (aka risotto)\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: saut\'e9, then simmer\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
butter, unsalted\par
celery\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, red\par
chives\par
crab\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon\par
lemon thyme\par
lime, zest\par
mushrooms (e.g., chanterelles, morels, shiitake)\par
mussels\par
mustard seeds\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
prosciutto\par
saffron\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
sorrel\par
squid\par
stocks: chicken, fish, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles\par
veal\par
vermouth\par
wine: dry red or white\par
zucchini blossoms\par
Flavor Affinities\par
risotto + artichokes + lemon + prosciutto\par
risotto + asparagus + chervil + morel mushrooms\par
risotto + asparagus + saffron + scallops\par
risotto + bacon + butternut squash + maple syrup + sage\par
risotto + chanterelle mushrooms + zucchini blossoms\par
risotto + chorizo + clams + saffron\par
risotto + corn + Parmesan cheese + scallions\par
risotto + corn + Parmesan cheese + shrimp\par
risotto + mussels + parsley + peas\par
risotto + pancetta + Parmesan cheese + pumpkin\par
risotto + peas + prosciutto\par
risotto + sweet onions + Parmesan cheese\par
risotto + veal + black truffles\par
RICE, BASMATI\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: boil, simmer\par
almonds\par
basil\par
bay leaves\par
bell peppers\par
butter\par
buttermilk\par
cardamom\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, esp. dried red\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cream / milk\par
cumin\par
currants\par
curry leaves\par
fennel seeds\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
lime, juice\par
milk\par
mint\par
nuts\par
oil: canola, macadamia\par
onions, esp. green, red\par
orange\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
pistachios\par
potatoes\par
raisins, yellow\par
saffron\par
salt, kosher\par
spinach\par
sugar\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
RICE, CARNAROLI (See Rice, Arborio)\par
RICE, JASMINE (See Thai Cuisine)\par
RICE, WILD\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: simmer\par
butter, unsalted\par
celery\par
game\par
game birds\par
lemon, zest\par
Midwestern American cuisine\par
oil: hazelnut, vegetable, walnut\par
Odette Fada of New York\rquote s San Domenico on Risotto\par
I am from Northern Italy and grew up eating risotto. Back then, we mainly ate\par
risotto Milanese [i.e., saffron risotto, traditionally served with osso buco or with\par
a mild pork sausage crumbled in with some rosemary]. We would also put it in\par
soup \f2\emdash\f1  or even just eat it simply with some grated cheese.\par
I love it because it only takes one pan, and it is ready in 20 minutes! People\par
think it takes a long time but if you were to cook a piece of fish, wash greens,\par
and make a salad dressing, that would take just as long.\par
You can make risotto with almost anything. I love it with fruit, vegetables, or\par
fish. One of my favorite fruit risottos is a seasonal one with pears and\par
Gorgonzola. The pears give a nice, sweet crunch to the dish. I also like making\par
risotto with Prosecco, strawberries, and nettles.\par
A classic combination in Italy in fall is game with blueberry jam and\par
mushrooms. I have adapted this and for over twenty years have been serving\par
risotto with porcini mushrooms and blueberries tossed in at the last second.\par
I also like to make a risotto with fresh herbs like rosemary, thyme, or oregano\par
\f2\emdash\f1  and then at the end I\rquote ll cover it with an extra-thin slice of lard [pork jowl] that\par
has a mild flavor. It just melts into the risotto and is out of this world.\par
Each ingredient you add to your risotto will dictate when it should be added. If it\par
is something delicate like a berry, it gets added very late so it will not break up.\par
If you are making a seafood risotto \f2\emdash\f1  say, with octopus \f2\emdash\f1  it should be added\par
early so it has time to cook all the way through.\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pepper, ground\par
pine nuts\par
salt\par
sausage, smoked\par
scallions\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
RIESLING\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
apples\par
cheese, esp. blue, soft, triple cr\'e8me\par
chicken\par
curries, esp. milder\par
duck\par
fish\par
fruit, esp. summer\par
ham, esp. baked\par
pork\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salmon, smoked\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
shellfish\par
trout, esp. saut\'e9ed\par
Dishes\par
Rose and Almond Panna Cotta\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
Tropical Fruit Salad with Rosewater and Sweet Tahini Yogurt \f2\emdash\f1  Brad\par
Farmerie, Public (New York City)\par
Floral flavors, when done well, can be really amazing. This is also special\par
because it is something that I never grew up with. Someone from India may not\par
find it a big deal.\par
I tend to think in threes. I\rquote ll pair two classic ingredients, and add a third to\par
elevate the combination. I make my own rose-flavored dessert that was inspired\par
by [French pastry chef] Pierre Herm\'e9 and his rose macaroon with raspberry and\par
lychee, which is one of the greatest things I have tasted in my life. I coat a\par
standard tart shell with a layer of liquid raspberry; on top of that I place a rose\par
parfait, which I pair with lemon and pistachio. To make the rose flavor not so\par
overbearing, I use it in three different forms. I infuse rosebuds [used to make\par
rosewater] in the milk for the parfait, and I also use rose syrup, which adds color\par
and sweetness, and finally rosewater as well. You have to be careful with rose\par
because it can be like eating perfume. That is why I take a lot of care using three\par
layers to make it one flavor.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
ROASTED DISHES\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
beef\par
beets\par
carrots\par
celery root\par
chicken\par
fennel\par
ham\par
lamb\par
onions\par
parsnips\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rutabagas\par
shallots\par
squash, winter (e.g., butternut)\par
turkey\par
turnips\par
veal: loin, rib\par
vegetables, root\par
venison\par
yams\par
ROMAINE (See Lettuce, Romaine)\par
ROSE (Hips, Petals, Water)\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
baked goods (e.g., cakes)\par
cream / milk\par
desserts\par
fruit\par
honey\par
ice cream\par
Indian cuisine desserts\par
lemon\par
lychee\par
pistachios\par
raspberries\par
rice and rice pudding\par
vanilla\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rose + almonds + cream/milk\par
rose + honey + yogurt\par
rose + lemon + pistachios\par
rose + lychee + raspberries\par
ROSEMARY\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: pungent\par
Weight: heavy, tough-leaved\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add early in the cooking process.\par
In winter, rosemary is milder; in summer, it is stronger.\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
apricots\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
baked goods (e.g., breads, cakes, cookies)\par
bay leaf\par
BEANS, esp. dried, fava, white, green\par
beef\par
bell peppers\par
bouquet garni (key ingredient)\par
braised dishes\par
breads\par
Brussels sprouts\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
celery\par
chicken, esp. grilled\par
chives\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
duck\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
figs\par
FISH, esp. grilled\par
focaccia\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
fruit\par
game: rabbit, venison\par
*GARLIC\par
gin\par
grains\par
grapefruit: juice, zest\par
grapes\par
grilled dishes, esp. meats, vegetables\par
herbes de Provence (key ingredient)\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
*LAMB\par
lavender\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liver\par
lovage\par
mackerel\par
marinades\par
marjoram\par
MEATS, esp. grilled, roasted\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
milk\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
octopus\par
OLIVE OIL\par
ONIONS\par
orange: juice\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
pasta\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
pizza\par
polenta\par
PORK\par
POTATOES\par
poultry\par
radicchio\par
rice\par
risotto\par
roasted meats\par
sage\par
salmon\par
sardines\par
sauces\par
savory\par
scallops, esp. grilled\par
Rosemary has a strong flavor, so it\rquote s always going to be the star. It works with\par
strong, assertive fish like swordfish or tuna \f2\emdash\f1  and, of course, it is a classic with\par
lamb.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DAVID WALTUCK, CHANTERELLE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Rosemary works with apples or pears.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
When I think of rosemary, I think of octopus. It works so well in a ceviche with\par
octopus, black olives, and potato.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Rosemary can be strong with seafood unless it is a full-flavored seafood. We\par
will skewer mussels with rosemary and panfry them because they work with the\par
piney flavor of the mussels.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
Rosemary works well with citrus and honey.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
The Martinique rums tend to be drier, while Haitian rums tend to be spicier. I\par
use more spices with rum in general, and herbs with spirits such as gin.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRI BANKS, COCKTAIL CONSULTANT (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I love the combination of rum with carrots. Carrot juice provides a bright color\par
that sends a message, especially to women. It has its own natural sweetness, and\par
a little goes a long way. Carrots go beautifully with lemon thyme and orange, but\par
I especially love the combination of carrots and ginger. In the autumn months,\par
I\rquote ll combine gold rum with carrot and apple juices and autumn spices. I\rquote ll infuse\par
allspice, cinnamon, and nutmeg into a tea or tisane, and add that to the cocktail.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRI BANKS, COCKTAIL CONSULTANT (NEW YORK CITY)\par
shellfish\par
sherry\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
spinach\par
squash: summer, winter\par
steaks\par
stews\par
strawberries\par
strongly flavored foods\par
sweet potatoes\par
swordfish\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES, tomato juice, tomato sauce\par
tuna\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. grilled, roasted\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine\par
zucchini (say some)\par
AVOID\par
corn\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
salads\par
zucchini (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rosemary + anchovies + garlic\par
rosemary + butter + lemon\par
rosemary + garlic + lamb\par
rosemary + garlic + lemon\par
rosemary + garlic + wine\par
rosemary + onions + potatoes\par
rosemary + Parmesan cheese + polenta\par
rosemary + pork + sherry\par
RUM\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 heavy (light to dark rum)\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
apples: fruit, juice\par
bananas: fruit, liqueur\par
butter\par
butterscotch\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
carrot: juice\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
Coca-Cola\par
coconut: fruit, milk, water\par
cream and ice cream\par
fruit juice\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grenadine\par
LEMON: JUICE\par
LIME: JUICE\par
maple syrup\par
maraschino liqueur\par
mint\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
ORANGE: JUICE\par
passion fruit\par
pineapple\par
pumpkin\par
punch (key ingredient)\par
raisins\par
SPICES: allspice, cinnamon, nutmeg, star anise\par
SUGAR, ESP. BROWN\par
tropical fruits\par
vanilla\par
vermouth: dry, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rum + apples + butter + nuts + vanilla\par
rum + apples + carrot juice + spices\par
rum + apples + cinnamon + pumpkin\par
rum + coconut water + tropical fruits\par
rum + lime + banana + sugar\par
rum + lime + mint + sugar\par
rum + lime + pineapple + sugar\par
RUSSIAN CUISINE\par
beets\par
cabbage\par
caraway seeds\par
caviar\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cumin\par
dill\par
fish: pickled, smoked\par
fruits and fruit sauces\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
herring\par
lamb, grilled\par
meats, skewered and grilled\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
poppy seeds\par
potatoes\par
saffron\par
sausages\par
sour cream\par
tarragon\par
vinegar\par
vodka\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
mushrooms + cloves + pepper + vinegar\par
RUTABAGAS\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, deep-fry, puree, roast, steam\par
allspice\par
apples\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
broccoli\par
butter, clarified\par
caraway seeds\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
cheese: blue, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
Dishes\par
Apple-Rutabaga Soup\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Patrick O\rquote Connell, The Inn at Little Washington (Washington, Virginia)\par
cumin\par
dill\par
duck\par
garlic, esp. roasted\par
ginger\par
greens, bitter\par
honey\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
mace\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
pears\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rabbit\par
raisins\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt\par
savory\par
scallions\par
soups\par
squash, butternut\par
star anise\par
stock, chicken\par
sweet potatoes\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vinaigrette / vinegar\par
watercress\par
Flavor Affinities\par
rutabagas + apples + maple syrup\par
rutabagas + cheese + potatoes\par
rutabagas + potatoes + rosemary\par
SAFFRON\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\f2\endash\f1 bitter\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: very light\par
Volume: very loud\par
Tips: Add later in the cooking process; saffron is activated by the heat of\par
cooking.\par
This bright yellow/orange-hued spice is used for its color as well as its\par
flavor.\par
A little saffron goes a very long way \f2\emdash\f1  never add more than necessary.\par
anise\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
beef\par
BOUILLABAISSE\par
breads\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
cheese\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
corn\par
couscous\par
cream and ice cream\par
cumin\par
curries\par
custards\par
Dishes\par
Saffron Panna Cotta with \ldblquote Agrumi Misti\rdblquote  and Blood Orange Sorbetto \f2\emdash\f1\par
Gina DePalma, pastry chef, Babbo (New York City)\par
I would definitely have saffron on hand for Spanish cooking. It lends itself to\par
rice, seafood, meat, and poultry. You can combine saffron and salt together for a\par
saffron salt that is incredibly aromatic. Saffron also works very well on a salad.\par
People forget that saffron is a flower and, sprinkled on a salad, it aromatizes the\par
greens.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Saffron has a sweet power. It is a classic flavor to add to shellfish, but the\par
minute you taste the saffron in a dish, there is too much.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
I wanted to come up with a panna cotta that was unlike anyone else\rquote s. I was\par
walking down the street thinking of Italian dishes and risotto Milanese [which is\par
made with saffron] came to mind. This led me to think about saffron, and the\par
idea of adding saffron to my panna cotta. After Ruth Reichl mentioned it in the\par
New York Times review of Babbo, Mario [Batali] told me I could never take it off\par
the menu!\par
Saffron has a bright metallic flavor, and with quince \f2\emdash\f1  which is floral, delicate,\par
and perfumed \f2\emdash\f1  it is wonderful. Over the years, I have found that saffron\par
unexpectedly changes its flavor depending on what fruit is paired with it. Each\par
fruit I work with either turns up its floral component or its metallic flavor.\par
Saffron is great with stone fruits like apples, peaches, pears, plums, and figs. It\par
also works with citrus like blood oranges, kumquats, and grapefruit. On the other\par
hand, it doesn\rquote t work with many berries. It makes strawberries a little flat, and is\par
downright awful with cranberries.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
FISH\par
fruit\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
halibut\par
ice cream\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
mayonnaise\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
North African cuisine\par
nutmeg\par
onions, esp. Spanish, Vidalia\par
orange\par
paella\par
paprika\par
pepper\par
potatoes\par
rabbit\par
ras el hanout (ingredient)\par
*RICE\par
*RISOTTO\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
SHELLFISH\par
shrimp\par
soups, esp. chicken, fish\par
Spanish cuisine\par
spinach\par
squash, winter\par
stews, esp. fish\par
tomatoes\par
turbot\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
saffron + fish + rice\par
saffron + ginger + vanilla\par
saffron + monkfish + rice\par
SAGE\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early summer\par
Taste: sweet, bitter, sour\par
Weight: moderate\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Always use cooked (never raw); add near the end of the cooking\par
process.\par
apples\par
asparagus\par
bay leaf\par
BEANS, esp. dried, green\par
beef\par
blueberries\par
bread\par
butter\par
cabbage\par
caraway\par
carrots\par
CHEESE, esp. Brie, feta, Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, ricotta\par
cherries, esp. tart\par
Sage has a much better flavor when it is cooked first. We will cook it in butter,\par
olive oil, or bacon fat.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
CHICKEN, esp. roasted\par
chickpeas\par
citrus\par
corn\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
European cuisine\par
fattier foods, esp. meats\par
fennel\par
fish, esp. oilier\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger, dried\par
goose\par
Greek cuisine\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lemon\par
lemon herbs (balm, thyme, verbena)\par
liver\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
meats, fattier, richer, and/or roasted\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
offal\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS\par
orange\par
oregano\par
oysters (e.g., stuffing)\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
PASTA, esp. gnocchi, ravioli\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
*PORK\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
prosciutto\par
pumpkin\par
rice\par
rich dishes\par
rosemary\par
salads: pasta, potato\par
sausages\par
savory\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
skate\par
slow-cooked dishes\par
soups, esp. legumes\par
Spanish cuisine\par
squash, winter\par
steak\par
stews\par
stocks\par
STUFFING\par
swordfish\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
Every salad should have elements of bitter, salt, heat, and texture. For us, the\par
bitter component is often the greens. We use a lot of fris\'e9e, radicchio, and\par
endive. But there always needs to be some crunch in a salad. Even if it is a\par
delicate salad, you need to find a way to get a crunch in there. For a delicate\par
salad, you can get crunch using fried shallot rings or crispy sage leaves. We\par
often use nuts for crunch. Our leaf salad has a cashew brittle, which is made by\par
caramelizing sugar then seasoning it with salt, black pepper, a hint of madras\par
curry, a pinch of our Moroccan spice blend (eighteen ingredients), and a pinch of\par
pepper mix (four ingredients) before tossing the nuts in. The other components\par
of the salad are pomegranate seeds, bacon, and a South American blue cheese.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
When you are eating a salad, the greens are the main ingredient, so whatever\par
you add has to elevate them. Lettuce is boring by itself, so you elevate it with the\par
vinaigrette. We will use herbs in our salads, but they must not overpower the\par
greens; they have to be very subtle and used in small amounts. We will use\par
chives or fresh parsley leaves or a combination of the two. We may also add\par
some mint to the mix because it pushes the flavors of the greens.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ERIC RIPERT, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
turkey\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
walnuts\par
wine, esp. white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sage + marjoram + thyme\par
sage + parsley + rosemary + thyme\par
sage + pasta + walnuts\par
sage + stuffing + turkey + walnuts\par
SAKE\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
cucumber\par
fish\par
gin\par
JAPANESE CUISINE\par
lemon juice\par
lime juice\par
salads\par
sashimi and sushi\par
shellfish\par
sugar (simple syrup)\par
vodka\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sake + cucumber + lime\par
SALADS (See also Lettuces and other vegetables)\par
SALMON (See also Fish \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, grill, marinate, panfry, poach, raw (e.g.,\par
sashimi, tartare), roast, saut\'e9, sear, steam\par
anchovies\par
apples, esp. Golden Delicious or Granny Smith, and apple cider\par
artichoke hearts\par
arugula\par
asparagus (accompaniment)\par
bacon\par
barbecue sauce\par
basil: leaf, oil\par
bass\par
bay leaf\par
beans: fava, flageolets, white\par
beets\par
beurre blanc\par
bread crumbs: regular, panko\par
Brussels sprouts\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
cabbage, esp. green, savoy\par
capers\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
Champagne\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: dried, fresh, green, jalape\'f1o, red, Thai\par
King White Salmon by Gabriel Kreuther of New York City\rquote s The\par
Modern\par
The salmon is roasted, and served with warm, slightly charred cucumbers,\par
which I like because they are rarely used cooked. We use market vegetables that\par
right now are bok choy and peas. I have added some trout caviar for a briny\par
flavor because salmon is on the sweet side. The dish is then finished with a\par
hickory broth.\par
For the hickory broth, we smoke some hickory chips, wrap them in\par
cheesecloth with juniper berries and peppercorns, and then submerge them in\par
water to make a broth. This creates a smoked sauce that is light and tasty. What\par
we have here is a \ldblquote wood stock\rdblquote  that makes perfect sense with the salmon\par
because so often salmon is smoked. After the wood comes out, you taste the\par
broth to adjust it. It may need some more water to cut the wood and smoke\par
flavor, or it might need to be reduced to intensify it. We finish the sauce with a\par
little half-and-half, and foam it with a handheld mixer.\par
CHIVES (garnish)\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coconut: shredded, milk\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cornichons\par
crab\par
CREAM, HEAVY\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry: leaves, powder, sauce (esp. red)\par
daikon\par
dill\par
eggs: hard-boiled, scrambled\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek seeds\par
GARLIC\par
ginger: fresh\par
grapefruit: juice, zest\par
greens, bitter\par
horseradish\par
juniper berries\par
kelp\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lemongrass\par
LENTILS\par
lettuces (e.g., fris\'e9e)\par
licorice\par
LIME: juice, leaves, zest\par
lovage\par
Madeira\par
mangoes\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mirepoix\par
mirin\par
miso, white\par
Vitaly Paley of Portland\rquote s Paley\rquote s Place on Cooking Salmon on a\par
Plank\par
Salmon is a big part of cooking in the Northwest. We get ours anywhere from\par
Oregon up to Alaska.\par
The first cooking process that comes to mind in this part of the country is\par
called cedar planking, which is a Native American technique. You see planking\par
in all the best cooking catalogs, but the problem is that you cook the fish, throw\par
it out, and keep the plank because the plank is inevitably more expensive than\par
the fish! So here is one tip: Instead, do what we do and go to a lumber yard and\par
pick up untreated cedar shingles. They come in a huge bundle for $16.\par
To get the most out of plank cooking, the salmon needs to be brined or\par
marinated. I have two favorite marinades \f2\emdash\f1  one that is wet, and one that is dry.\par
The wet marinade is a 60/40 mixture of soy sauce and cream sherry, lots of\par
sliced ginger, heads of garlic cut in half, and chopped scallions. The sherry adds\par
just a touch of sweetness to the fish, which I like. Let the fish sit in that marinade\par
for a couple of hours and then it is ready to take on the smoke.\par
The dry marinade is a more traditional marinade of a 60/40 ratio of brown\par
sugar and salt with orange zest [grated] on a microplane [fine grater]. I mix this\par
all together and lavishly rub it over a salmon with the skin on, which protects it\par
from getting too salty or sweet. The sugar in this rub balances out the salt and\par
adds another dimension to the fish with caramelization happening a lot quicker.\par
The sweetness is almost hidden; it is that \ldblquote What\rquote s-that-flavor?\rdblquote  aspect to the\par
fish. Marinate for a couple of hours, then wipe off the rub slightly, and it is ready\par
to go. The 60/40 ratio of sugar to salt is good because it is pretty forgiving if you\par
leave the fish in the marinade a half hour too long.\par
I recommend brushing the plank lightly with some olive oil, throwing it on a\par
hot grill, putting the fish on, and letting it catch on fire, because when the plank\par
is on fire, that is the flavor you are looking for. When the burning plank gets\par
close to the fish, cover the grill to smother the fire and let the smoke do the rest\par
of the work.\par
Salmon has been my favorite fish since I learned to cook it correctly. It is so\par
versatile: you can smoke it, marinate it, or even serve it raw. Because it is rich\par
and fatty, it pairs well with everything from a red wine sauce to a simple\par
vinaigrette.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Tomato and pineapple with salmon: This dish goes back to 1975 when someone\par
gave me a salad of tomato and pineapple. I didn\rquote t know what to do with it, so I\par
stored the idea away. Today, I will cook the tomato, pineapple, a dash of white\par
wine for acid, miso, and the salmon head, which bridges and brings the flavors\par
together. Tomato gets fruitier when cooked with pineapple. The end result\par
doesn\rquote t taste like either tomato or pineapple; it is a new flavor. This sauce is\par
perfect with salmon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHEL RICHARD, CITRONELLE (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
Dishes\par
Salmon Gravlax with Chickpea Pancake, Caviar, and Mustard \f2\emdash\f1  Tom\par
Valenti, Ouest (New York City)\par
Dishes\par
Seared Salmon with Potatoes, Leeks, and Mustard-Chive Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Lidia\par
Bastianich, Felidia (New York City)\par
Pistachio-Crusted Salmon Medallions with Garlic Mashed Potatoes, Crispy\par
Fennel, Arugula, Olives, Roasted Peppers, and Savory Tomato Butter \f2\emdash\f1\par
Bob Kinkead, Kinkead\rquote s (Washington, DC)\par
Wild Salmon with Horseradish Crust, Cabbage, and Riesling \f2\emdash\f1  Gabriel\par
Kreuther, The Modern (New York City)\par
House-Made Graviax with Scrambled Eggs, Pumpernickel, Herb Cr\'e8me\par
Fra\'eeche, and Red Onions \f2\emdash\f1  Tony Liu, August (New York City)\par
Salmon Rubbed with Ground Red Chile and Lime and Pan Seared. Served\par
with a Tangy, Spicy Tomatillo, Jalape\'f1o, and Lime Juice Sauce \f2\emdash\f1  Zarela\par
Martinez, Zarela (New York City)\par
Wild Alaskan Troll Red King Salmon, Yukon Potato Gnocchi, Braised\par
Artichokes and Leeks, Enriched Chicken Jus with Chives and Chervil \f2\emdash\f1\par
Carrie Nahabedian, Naha (Chicago)\par
Signature Sushi: Salmon with Mango Puree; Seared Salmon Belly with\par
Lemon Soy \f2\emdash\f1  Kaz Okochi, Kaz Sushi Bistro (Washington, DC)\par
Pistachio-Crusted Salmon with Curried Spinach Salad, Mandarin Orange\par
Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Salmon with Grilled Vegetables, Baby Artichokes, Israeli Couscous, Warm\par
Vegetable Vinaigrette \f2\emdash\f1  Alfred Portale, Gotham Bar and Grill (New York\par
City)\par
Wild Salmon: Barely Cooked Wild Alaskan Salmon; Morels and Spring\par
Vegetables in a Wild Mushroom Pot au Feu \f2\emdash\f1  Eric Ripert, Le Bernardin\par
(New York City)\par
Slow-Roasted Scottish Salmon, Caramelized Fennel, Red Wine\f2\endash\f1 Fennel\par
Emulsion \f2\emdash\f1  Rick Tramonto, Tru (Chicago)\par
Darjeeling Tea\f2\endash\f1 Cured Salmon with English Cucumber and Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche\par
\f2\emdash\f1  Charlie Trotter, Trotter\rquote s to Go (Chicago)\par
Roasted Salmon with Sweet Corn Flan, Chanterelles, Prosciutto, Zucchini,\par
Corn-Chive Butter, and Shrimp Oil \f2\emdash\f1  Tom Valenti, Ouest (New York City)\par
mushrooms, esp. black trumpet, button, chanterelles, cremini, morels,\par
oysters\par
mussels\par
MUSTARD: Dijon, whole grain\par
mustard seeds\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, peanut (for cooking), sesame, vegetable (for\par
cooking)\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, esp. black, ni\'e7oise, picholine, Proven\'e7al\par
ONIONS, esp. pearl, red, Vidalia, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oysters\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, green, pink, red, white\par
Pernod\par
pike\par
pineapple and pineapple juice\par
pistachios\par
polenta\par
ponzu sauce\par
port\par
POTATOES\par
radishes\par
ramps\par
rice (e.g., basmati, sushi)\par
roe: flying fish, salmon\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sake\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauces: b\'e9arnaise, beurre blanc, brown butter hollandaise\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame seeds\par
SHALLOTS\par
shiso leaves\par
smoked salmon\par
sole\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
STOCKS: chicken, fish, mussels, veal, vegetable\par
sugar: brown, white\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tamarind\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
tilefish\par
TOMATOES\par
tomatoes, sun-dried\par
truffles: oil, shaved, white\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR, e.g., balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, rice, sherry, white\par
wine\par
watercress\par
WINE: dry white or red (Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot Noir)\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
salmon + apple + horseradish + rosemary\par
salmon + avocado + chile peppers + grapefruit\par
salmon + bacon + cabbage + chestnuts\par
salmon + bacon + lentils + sherry vinegar\par
salmon + basil + white beans\par
salmon + beets + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + cucumber + horseradish\par
salmon + caviar + vermouth\par
salmon + chervil + chives + leeks + lemon + morels + peas + potatoes\par
salmon + cucumber + balsamic vinegar\par
salmon + cucumber + dill\par
salmon + cucumber + dill + horseradish\par
salmon + cucumber + tomato\par
salmon + lemon juice + Dijon mustard\par
salmon + marjoram + peas\par
salmon + miso + pineapple + tomato + white wine\par
salmon + mustard + scallions\par
salmon + orange + tomato\par
salmon + peas + potatoes\par
salmon + pineapple + tomatoes\par
salmon + potato + watercress\par
SALMON, CURED\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
aquavit\par
avocados\par
basil\par
beans, white\par
bell peppers, red\par
bread: pumpernickel, rye\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
Champagne\par
chives\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lentils, green\par
lime: juice, zest\par
mustard: Dijon, dry\par
olive oil\par
orange, zest\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
sour cream\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
SALMON, SMOKED\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
artichokes\par
avocados\par
bell peppers, roasted\par
blini\par
bread: bagels, pumpernickel, rye, white\par
My signature sushi roll pairs salmon with mango puree and sushi rice. However,\par
I wouldn\rquote t serve salmon with mango puree as sashimi. The balance would be\par
lost. Also, mango doesn\rquote t pair well with either soy sauce or wasabi.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KAZ OKOCHI, KAZ SUSHI BISTRO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
We roast salmon wrapped in squash blossom and it imparts a slight zucchini\par
flavor to the salmon. The blossom is mild and makes a perfect package for the\par
salmon by steaming it as it cooks. With the salmon we serve a [zucchini] squash\par
cut into spaghetti seasoned with lemon thyme and basil. The herbs work with\par
both the zucchini and the salmon.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JERRY TRAUNFELD, THE HERBFARM (WOODINVILLE, WASHINGTON)\par
I love combining fruit and proteins. I am one-half Hawaiian, and in Hawaiian\par
cooking a classic dish is Spam cooked with fresh pineapple. I grew up with my\par
father making it for us, and it is delicious. You\rquote ll also see a lot of sushi chefs\par
combine kiwi and scallops, as fruit adds a nice cleansing note to the protein you\par
are working with. Our take on this combination is pineapple salmon with\par
avocado and quinoa. We cut pineapple very thin, then wrap it around salmon\par
belly, which is very rich. When we cook it, the pineapple gets caramelized and\par
helps cut the fat of the salmon. On the dish is a sweet-hot sauce of avocado,\par
honey, scallions, and serrano chiles. To garnish the dish and add some crunch we\par
add quinoa that is cooked then dried for three days before cooking it in olive oil,\par
which makes it puff like Rice Krispies.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  KATSUYA FUKUSHIMA, MINIBAR (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
breakfast / brunch\par
butter: clarified, unsalted\par
capers\par
caviar\par
celery\par
celery root\par
Champagne\par
chervil\par
chicory\par
CHIVES\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
CREAM CHEESE\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
daikon\par
DILL\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled, and egg salad\par
fris\'e9e\par
garlic\par
Dishes\par
Smoked Salmon with Crispy Potatoes and Horseradish Cream \f2\emdash\f1  Jean Joho,\par
Brasserie Jo (Chicago)\par
Rosti Potato Cake with Herb Mascarpone and Fresh-Smoked Salmon \f2\emdash\f1\par
Monica Pope, T\rquote afia (Houston)\par
Leek Tart with Smoked Salmon and Cr\'e8me Fra\'eeche \f2\emdash\f1  Michel Richard,\par
Citronelle (Washington, DC)\par
ginger, fresh\par
horseradish\par
juniper\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lime: juice, zest\par
mascarpone\par
monkfish\par
mussels, smoked\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red, sweet\par
orange\par
oysters\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
Pernod\par
potatoes and potato salad\par
radishes\par
salmon\par
salmon roe\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
shiso leaf\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: clam, fish\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
tea sandwiches\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt (say some)\par
AVOID\par
mayonnaise\par
yogurt (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
smoked salmon + chives + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + dill + pumpernickel-rye blini\par
smoked salmon + chives + dill + scrambled eggs + potatoes\par
smoked salmon + cream cheese + lemon juice + shallots + sour cream\par
smoked salmon + cucumber + horseradish + mint\par
smoked salmon + dill + horseradish + lemon juice + sour cream\par
SALSIFY\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, pan roast, stew\par
anchovies\par
butter\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
chives\par
cream\par
duck prosciutto\par
fish (e.g., halibut)\par
hollandaise sauce\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
mayonnaise\par
mushrooms\par
nutmeg\par
oil, peanut\par
onions\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
polenta\par
prosciutto\par
rice\par
sage\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt, kosher\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
sorrel\par
We use fleur de sel on cold dishes, such as salads. We also use it on meats like\par
beef, buffalo rib eye, or roast chicken after they are sliced and a moment before\par
serving.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
soups\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme, fresh\par
truffles, black\par
vinaigrettes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
salsify + Parmesan cheese + prosciutto\par
SALT \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Taste: salty\par
Function: warming\par
SALT, FLEUR DE SEL\par
chicken\par
cold dishes\par
meats\par
radishes\par
salads\par
steak\par
SALT, HAWAIIAN\par
ceviche\par
chicken\par
lamb\par
meat, esp. barbecued\par
pork\par
seafood\par
steak\par
vegetables, esp. tomatoes\par
I like to use Hawaiian salt on a dish where I want a little crunch. This holds up\par
better than other salts that will dissolve more quickly. I will use it on ceviche,\par
which has a little broth.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
SALT, JAPANESE\par
fish\par
foie gras\par
salmon\par
sashimi\par
squid\par
Japanese salt has ground seaweed in it and works on sashimi. I use this in\par
Japanese dishes.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
SALT, KOSHER\par
breads\par
brines\par
charcuterie\par
cocktails, esp. rims\par
cooking\par
cures\par
meats\par
potatoes\par
pretzels\par
toasts\par
water for blanching or for pasta\par
We use kosher salt primarily for meats.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
SALT, MALDON\par
fish, esp. raw\par
finishing dishes\par
lobster\par
[Maldon] is the finest of all salts in regard to both flavor and texture. I\par
appreciate its delicacy on fish, especially lobster.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
SALT, SEA \f2\emdash\f1  COARSE\par
meats\par
seafood\par
seasoning\par
vegetables, hearty\par
SALT, SEA \f2\emdash\f1  FINE\par
baking\par
fish\par
seasoning\par
vegetables, delicate\par
For delicate foods like vegetables or fish, we use ground sea salt right before it\par
goes into the pan.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
SALT, SMOKED\par
brines, esp. for pork\par
chicken\par
fish, esp. raw\par
meats: barbecued, red\par
pork\par
potatoes, baked\par
seafood\par
salmon\par
sardines\par
steak\par
tuna\par
vegetarian dishes\par
The Danish smoked salt we use is smoked over Chardonnay vines. For us,\par
using smoked salt provides the flavor of cooking over grape vines as they do in\par
Spain. Smoked salt is also great if you don\rquote t have a grill, because even a gas grill\par
can\rquote t provide a smoky flavor. I like smoked salt sprinkled on sardines, which in\par
Spain will be cooked over a fire on the beach where they get really smoky. I can\par
give that sense of place by using this salt on my sardines.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ALEXANDRA RAIJ, T\'cdA POL (NEW YORK CITY)\par
SALT, TRUFFLE\par
egg dishes\par
pastas\par
popcorn\par
potatoes\par
risotto\par
salads and salad dressing\par
SALT, VANILLA\par
chicken\par
chocolate, esp. dark\par
lamb\par
meats\par
mussels\par
nuts\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
shellfish, esp. lobster or scallops\par
squash, winter\par
sweet potatoes\par
SALTINESS\par
Taste: salty\par
Function: heating; stimulates salivation; enhances the flavors of\par
ingredients\par
Tips: Adding salt to a dish diminishes the effects of bitter, sour, and sweet.\par
anchovies\par
bacon\par
capers\par
caperberries\par
caviar and other fish roe\par
cheeses, salty (e.g., feta, manchego, Parmesan, pecorino)\par
clams and clam juice\par
cured meats\par
dashi (e.g., Japanese stock)\par
finnan haddie\par
fish sauce, Asian\par
gravlax\par
ham\par
ingredients with added salt (e.g., chips, nuts)\par
kelp\par
lemons, preserved\par
lox\par
nuts, salted\par
olives\par
oysters\par
oyster sauce\par
pancetta\par
pickles (salty-sour)\par
prosciutto\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt\par
salt cod\par
salt pork\par
sardines\par
sausages, salty (e.g., chorizo)\par
sea urchin\par
sea vegetables\par
seaweed\par
If you have a piece of Ib\'e9rico or Serrano ham in your refrigerator, you\rquote ll\par
eventually end up with this little end of dried-out salt-cured meat. While some\par
might just throw it away, we know there\rquote s a lot of flavor left \f2\emdash\f1  so we grind it up\par
in a coffee grinder and use it as meat-flavored salt. We call this \ldblquote ham salt,\rdblquote  and\par
will use this on a salad to emphasize the aroma and flavor of pork. . . . In Spain\par
we have mojama, which is tuna loin cured like ham. We\rquote ll grind it up in a coffee\par
grinder and it becomes tuna salt. When I sear tuna, I will sprinkle this on and\par
emphasize the tuna with its own tuna flavor. It is simple and dramatic. I even\par
showed this technique to the owner of the best tuna restaurant in the world \f2\emdash\f1\par
called El Campero in Barbate, Spain \f2\emdash\f1  where he serves tuna a hundred ways.\par
He loved it!\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOS\'c9 ANDR\'c9S, CAF\'c9 ATL\'c1NTICO (WASHINGTON, DC)\par
We use three different kinds of salt \f2\emdash\f1  but we also use capers, anchovies, olives,\par
preserved lemons, and even prosciutto for adding another dimension of\par
saltiness. Even when using these other salty components, 99 percent of the time\par
we\rquote ll use them in addition to salt, not instead of it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SHARON HAGE, YORK STREET (DALLAS)\par
Chefs on Selecting and Using Salt\par
Kosher salt has larger, harder crystals and won\rquote t break down too fast. I use this\par
for pasta water, brining, curing meat, and charcuterie. I use French sea salt\par
(esp. Baleine) for general seasoning. I like Maldon salt a lot. This is what I use\par
for finishing dishes. It has a really fine crystal and the flavor is great. It even\par
gives some crunch and melts like snowflakes. It is great sprinkled on raw fish.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Salt is now used very often in desserts and unfortunately it doesn\rquote t always make\par
sense. I was served a green apple sorbet with salt and it didn\rquote t work. Salt does\par
work on sweet oranges, though. If you cut a Cara Cara orange into wedges and\par
sprinkle sea salt on them, they are delicious. Salt also makes sense with caramel\par
and butterscotch. The salt is a contrast to the super sweet, which is why we like\par
PayDay candy bars.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  GINA DEPALMA, BABBO (NEW YORK CITY)\par
I use Maldon salt flakes as a salt for finishing dishes, and kosher salt for\par
blanching water or when I roast on salt. I\rquote ll sometimes use smoked salt with raw\par
fish or in a brine for pork, but it\rquote s really strong so you have to be careful with it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRADFORD THOMPSON, MARY ELAINE\rquote S AT THE PHOENICIAN (SCOTTSDALE,\par
ARIZONA)\par
There is salt in almost all of my desserts. However, you would not know it was\par
there until I took it out \f2\emdash\f1  which is how it should be. You don\rquote t need to taste the\par
salt, but it helps open the palate and stimulates your taste buds. With something\par
fatty like chocolate, you need some salt to brighten it up. I use all sorts of salts\par
with my desserts. We are making a peanut butter and jelly bonbon that I pair\par
with smoked Brittany sea salt. Maldon salt is shaved and more about texture,\par
because it is not as strong; I would use it on a pancake or something creamy.\par
Fleur de sel is a salt with texture and ocean floral notes, and would go well on\par
our panini which have cheese, arugula, and vinaigrette.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  JOHNNY IUZZINI, JEAN GEORGES (NEW YORK CITY)\par
Salt goes into almost every dough we make and is something that makes flavors\par
pop. Some chefs can go a little overboard, but desserts should still be sweet. Salt\par
works well with caramel and chocolate, obviously. I also use a vanilla salt with\par
a classic sweet potato tart that is cut into four slices with a few grains on each\par
slice. The salt reinforces the savoriness of the sweet potato and plays off the\par
brightness of the preserved lemon on the plate.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL LAISKONIS, LE BERNARDIN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
To counteract oversalting a dish, you need to increase the volume of whatever\par
you are making. That can be tricky, because you don\rquote t want to end up with\par
something too watery. Whenever there is a puree involved, whether it is mashed\par
potatoes or butternut squash soup, I encourage my cooks to make it thick. You\par
can always add, but not take away.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
seeds, salted\par
shrimp paste\par
smoked foods, esp. fish, meats\par
smoked salmon and trout\par
soy sauce\par
tamari\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
SARDINES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: braise, broil, fry, grill, marinate, poach, saut\'e9\par
anchovies\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, red\par
bread crumbs\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chives\par
coriander seeds\par
currants\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fennel pollen\par
fennel seeds\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ham\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
mirin\par
oil, peanut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions: red, white\par
Dishes\par
Marinated Fresh Sardines with Caramelized Fennel and Lobster Oil \f2\emdash\f1\par
Mario Batali, Babbo (New York City)\par
Whole Wheat Spaghetti with Fresh Sardines and Walnuts \f2\emdash\f1  David\par
Pasternak, Esca (New York City)\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
peppers, piquillo\par
pine nuts\par
raisins, esp. yellow\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
sake\par
salt, sea\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
verjus\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, e.g., balsamic, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white (e.g., Chenin Blanc, Grenache, Viognier)\par
zucchini\par
SAUERKRAUT\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Sauerkraut is shredded cabbage that is fermented in salt and spices.\par
apples\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. kidney and/or red\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
cider\par
cloves\par
duck\par
Eastern European cuisine\par
fat: duck, goose\par
French cuisine, esp. Alsatian\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
gin\par
ham: hocks, meat\par
JUNIPER BERRIES\par
Kirsch\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
pork, esp. loin\par
potatoes\par
rhubarb\par
salt, kosher\par
SAUSAGES, esp. blood, bratwurst, frankfurter, kielbasa\par
stock, chicken\par
vinegar: champagne, white wine\par
wine: dry to off-dry white (e.g., Alsatian, Riesling)\par
SAUSAGES (See also Chorizo)\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, grill, poach, saut\'e9, stew\par
apples\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
breakfast\par
broccoli rabe\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery root\par
celery seeds\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
seeds, salted\par
shrimp paste\par
smoked foods, esp. fish, meats\par
smoked salmon and trout\par
soy sauce\par
tamari\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
SARDINES\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: braise, broil, fry, grill, marinate, poach, saut\'e9\par
anchovies\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers, red\par
bread crumbs\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
chives\par
coriander seeds\par
currants\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
fennel pollen\par
fennel seeds\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ham\par
Italian cuisine, esp. southern\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
mirin\par
oil, peanut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions: red, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, white\par
peppers, piquillo\par
pine nuts\par
raisins, esp. yellow\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
sake\par
salt, sea\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
verjus\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar, e.g., balsamic, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white (e.g., Chenin Blanc, Grenache, Viognier)\par
zucchini\par
SAUERKRAUT\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Sauerkraut is shredded cabbage that is fermented in salt and spices.\par
apples\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. kidney and/or red\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
cider\par
cloves\par
duck\par
Eastern European cuisine\par
fat: duck, goose\par
French cuisine, esp. Alsatian\par
garlic\par
German cuisine\par
gin\par
ham: hocks, meat\par
JUNIPER BERRIES\par
Kirsch\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
pork, esp. loin\par
potatoes\par
rhubarb\par
salt, kosher\par
SAUSAGES, esp. blood, bratwurst, frankfurter, kielbasa\par
stock, chicken\par
vinegar: champagne, white wine\par
wine: dry to off-dry white (e.g., Alsatian, Riesling)\par
SAUSAGES (See also Chorizo)\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, grill, poach, saut\'e9, stew\par
apples\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
breakfast\par
broccoli rabe\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery root\par
celery seeds\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mustard, Dijon\par
oil, canola\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS: white, yellow\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper, black\par
potatoes, esp. boiled, mashed, pureed\par
radicchio\par
rosemary\par
salt, kosher\par
sauerkraut\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sausages + mustard + sauerkraut\par
sausages + onions + potatoes + tomatoes\par
sausages + radicchio + white beans\par
SAUVIGNON BLANC\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
asparagus\par
chicken\par
cilantro\par
fish\par
garlic\par
herbs\par
oysters, esp. raw\par
peppers\par
pork\par
salads\par
shellfish\par
tomatoes\par
turkey\par
vegetables\par
SAVORY\par
Weight: medium, tough-leaved\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud (Summer savory is quieter, winter savory is\par
louder.)\par
Tips: Can stand up to cooking.\par
Use summer savory with summer vegetables, and winter savory with winter\par
vegetables.\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
*BEANS, esp. dried, summer (e.g., fava, green, lima)\par
beef\par
beets\par
bell peppers\par
bouquet garni\par
braised dishes\par
Brussels sprouts\par
cabbage\par
cheese (e.g., goat) and cheese dishes\par
chicken\par
chicken livers\par
chives\par
cumin\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (ingredient)\par
fish, esp. baked or grilled\par
garlic\par
herbes de Provence (ingredient)\par
herbs, other (as a blending herb)\par
kale\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
legumes\par
lentils\par
mackerel\par
marjoram\par
meats, esp. grilled, roasted, stewed\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
nutmeg\par
olives\par
onions\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
peas\par
polenta\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry, esp. grilled\par
rabbit\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces and gravies\par
soups, esp. tomato-based\par
squash, summer\par
stews, esp. meat\par
stuffings (e.g., poultry)\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato sauces\par
veal\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
vinegar\par
wine, red\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
savory + garlic + tomatoes\par
SCALLIONS\par
Season: summer\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: braise, grill, raw, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
anise\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
cheese: goat, Parmesan\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
curry\par
dill\par
egg dishes\par
garlic\par
greens, bitter\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper, white\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sesame oil\par
sugar\par
Thai cuisine\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar\par
SCALLOPS\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sweet, esp. bay scallops\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: broil, deep-fry, gratin, grill, marinate, pan sear, poach, raw,\par
roast, saut\'e9, sear, steam, stir-fry, tartare\par
almonds\par
apples, esp. Granny Smith\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bacon and other cured meats (e.g., Serrano ham)\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: cannelini, fava, green, haricots verts, lima\par
bell peppers: red, green, yellow\par
bread crumbs\par
Brussels sprouts\par
BUTTER: brown, clarified, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots and carrot juice\par
cauliflower, esp. pureed\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
Champagne\par
cheese: Asiago, Parmesan\par
chervil\par
chile peppers: jalape\'f1o, poblano\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives (garnish)\par
cilantro\par
citron\par
citrus\par
clams\par
cloves\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
corn\par
coriander\par
crab\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
curry powder\par
dashi\par
dill\par
duck fat\par
edamame\par
eggs, hard-boiled\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
grapefruit: juice, zest\par
gremolata\par
ham\par
haricots verts\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
kaffir lime\par
kiwi fruit\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lemon thyme\par
lentils\par
LIME: juice, zest\par
lobster\par
mango\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
mint\par
morels\par
mushrooms: button, chanterelle, cremini, Japanese, porcini, portobello,\par
shiitake\par
mussels\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, peanut, vegetable\par
oil: almond, hazelnut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red, white, yellow\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pancetta\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
pasta\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
Pernod\par
pineapple\par
pomegranates and pomegranate juice\par
potatoes, esp. mashed\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sake\par
salmon roe\par
salsify\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauce, b\'e9chamel\par
sausages, chorizo\par
scallions\par
sea urchin\par
sesame: seeds, oil\par
SHALLOTS\par
shrimp\par
sole\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squash, butternut\par
squid\par
stocks: chicken, clam, fish, shrimp, veal, vegetable\par
sugar\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon, fresh\par
THYME, FRESH\par
tomatoes: canned, fresh, paste\par
truffles, esp. black, white\par
tuna\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vermouth\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, rice wine, sherry,\par
tarragon, white wine\par
watercress\par
WINE, DRY WHITE (e.g., Chablis, Chardonnay, Meursault, Riesling,\par
Sauvignon Blanc)\par
Vermouth\par
yuzu juice\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
scallops + almonds + cauliflower\par
scallops + apples + bacon + watercress\par
scallops + apples + tarragon\par
scallops + asparagus + butter + lemongrass\par
scallops + avocado + lemon + lobster\par
scallops + bacon + chives\par
scallops + bacon + garlic + chanterelle mushrooms\par
scallops + bacon + leeks\par
scallops + basil + caviar + chives + tomatoes\par
scallops + basil + chicken stock + duck fat + garlic + lemon juice +\par
tomatoes\par
scallops + basil + grapefruit\par
scallops + bay leaf + vanilla\par
scallops + Brussels sprouts + pancetta\par
scallops + carrot juice + pomegranate juice\par
scallops + cauliflower + cream\par
scallops + cilantro + lemon + sake\par
scallops + coriander + crab + lemon + thyme\par
scallops + dashi + Japanese mushrooms\par
scallops + edamame + mint\par
s\par
lime, juice\par
orange, juice\par
soda\par
tamarind syrup\par
vermouth\par
Flavor Affinities\par
scotch + Earl Grey tea + tamarind syrup\par
scotch + ginger + lemon juice\par
SEAFOOD \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL (See also specific fish and Shellfish)\par
Tips: Tap these ideas when cooking a medley of assorted seafood.\par
apples, esp. green\par
avocados\par
brandy, dry\par
capers\par
citrus\par
fennel\par
fruit\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
LEMON JUICE\par
mint\par
Old Bay seasoning\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: white, black\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salt\par
shallots\par
sherry\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegars\par
wine: dry white (e.g., Sancerre, Soave)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
seafood + brandy + sherry\par
seafood + fennel + lemon + mint\par
seafood + green apple + ginger\par
SESAME OIL (See Oil, Sesame)\par
SESAME SEEDS, BLACK\par
Taste: bitter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Tips: Use whole seeds.\par
apples\par
Asian cuisine\par
bananas\par
Chinese cuisine\par
fish\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
meats\par
mirin\par
rice\par
salt\par
seafood\par
sesame seeds, white\par
soy sauce\par
vegetables\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
SESAME SEEDS, WHITE\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Tips: Toast before using; use ground or whole.\par
allspice\par
apples\par
Asian cuisines\par
baked goods (e.g., bagels, breads, cakes, cookies)\par
bananas\par
beef\par
beets\par
breads and breadsticks\par
cardamom\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
Chinese cuisine (e.g., dim sum)\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
duck\par
eggplant\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey\par
hummus\par
ice cream\par
Indian cuisine\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lamb\par
Lebanese cuisine\par
legumes\par
lemon\par
meats\par
mole sauces\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
noodles\par
nutmeg\par
orange\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
pepper\par
rice\par
SALADS (green, pasta) and salad dressings\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame oil\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stir-fried dishes\par
sugar\par
sumac\par
tahini paste (key ingredient)\par
thyme\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vanilla\par
vegetables, esp. cold, green\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sesame seeds + honey + tahini paste + vanilla\par
sesame seeds + garlic + soy sauce + spinach\par
SHALLOTS\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Botanical relatives: chives, garlic, leeks, onions\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: blanch, braise, deep-fry, fry, roast, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
Tips: Shallots are milder than garlic or onions.\par
beef\par
butter\par
capers\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cod\par
cognac\par
cream\par
fish, esp. baked, grilled\par
French cuisine, esp. sauces\par
garlic\par
halibut\par
lemon, juice\par
meats, esp. grilled, roasted\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
oysters\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper, white\par
port\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salt\par
sauces (e.g., b\'e9arnaise, bordelaise, red wine)\par
sherry\par
squash, butternut\par
steak\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
veal\par
vinaigrettes\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, cider, red wine, sherry, white wine\par
wine\par
SHELLFISH (See also Crab, Lobster, Scallops, Shrimp, etc.)\par
Season: summer\par
almonds\par
bacon\par
basil\par
celery\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coconut\par
cream\par
curry\par
fennel\par
fines herbes (i.e., chervil, chives, parsley, tarragon)\par
fruit\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
hoisin sauce\par
LEMON\par
lemongrass\par
Old Bay seasoning\par
orange\par
saffron\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar\par
watermelon\par
wines, dry white (e.g., Sauvighon Blanc)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
shellfish + almonds + vanilla\par
shellfish + curry + lemongrass\par
shellfish + saffron + cream\par
SHIITAKE MUSHROOMS (See Mushrooms \f2\emdash\f1  Shiitakes)\par
SHISO LEAF\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: raw\par
apples\par
avocados\par
basil\par
beef\par
cabbage\par
chicken\par
chives\par
clams\par
crab\par
cucumbers\par
fish, esp. fried or oily\par
fried foods\par
ginger\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lime\par
meat\par
melon\par
mint\par
miso\par
noodles\par
onions\par
orange\par
parsley\par
pears\par
pickles\par
prawns\par
radishes\par
rice\par
salads: green, fruit\par
sea urchin\par
seafood\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
sushi and sashimi\par
tempura\par
turnips\par
vinegar\par
wasabi\par
yellowtail\par
Flavor Affinities\par
shiso leaf + avocado + crab\par
shiso leaf + clams + onions\par
SHORT RIBS (See Beef \f2\emdash\f1  Short Ribs)\par
SHRIMP (See also Shellfish)\par
Season: year\f2\endash\f1 round\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium (depending on size)\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: bake, barbecue, boil, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9,\par
steam, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples and apple cider\par
artichokes\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans: black, cranberry, fava, green, white\par
beer\par
bell peppers, red\par
bonito flakes (e.g., Japanese)\par
brandy\par
bread crumbs, panko\par
brown butter sauce\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage: green, red\par
Cajun cuisine\par
capers\par
carrots and carrot juice\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
chervil\par
chicory\par
CHILE PEPPERS, e.g., ancho, chipotle, dried red, jalape\'f1o, serrano\par
chili oil\par
chili paste\par
chili powder\par
chili sauce\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro (garnish)\par
cinnamon\par
clams\par
cloves\par
coconut: milk, shredded\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
CRAB\par
cream\par
Creole cuisine\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry leaf\par
curry powder or sauce\par
dill\par
eggs\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish, white\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
*GARLIC\par
ginger\par
greens, esp. beet, dandelion, collard, mustard, turnip\par
grits\par
hazelnut oil\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
Japanese cuisine\par
kaffir lime leaf\par
ketchup\par
Korean cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lettuce\par
lime: leaves, juice, whole, zest\par
lobster\par
mango\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
melon, cantaloupe\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint\par
mirin\par
monkfish\par
mushrooms, (e.g., chanterelles, shiitakes)\par
mussels\par
mustard: country, Dijon, dry (sauce)\par
mustard seeds\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, peanut, vegetable\par
oil: peanut, sesame (for drizzling)\par
Old Bay seasoning\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
ONIONS, esp. red, Spanish, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
oysters\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
peanuts\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pesto\par
pike\par
pineapple and pineapple juice\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
pumpkin\par
radishes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice (e.g., Arborio, bomba)\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
rum, dark\par
saffron\par
sage\par
sake\par
salsa\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauce, romesco\par
sausages (e.g., andouille)\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shallots\par
shiso leaf\par
snow peas\par
sour cream\par
Southern cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squid\par
squid ink\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, clam, fish, shrimp\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
tea sandwiches\par
tempura\par
Thai cuisine\par
thyme, lemon\par
TOMATOES and tomato paste, sun-dried\par
turmeric\par
vanilla\par
vermouth\par
Vietnamese cuisine\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: balsamic, rice wine, sherry, tarragon, wine\par
wasabi\par
watercress\par
WINE: dry white, rice, Sauternes\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt\par
yuzu juice\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
shrimp + bacon + chives\par
shrimp + basil + garlic + jalape\'f1o chile\par
shrimp + black beans + coriander\par
shrimp + cayenne + cinnamon + orange\par
shrimp + cepes mushrooms + curry powder + Dijon mustard\par
shrimp + chiles + lime juice + brown sugar\par
shrimp + coriander + tarragon\par
shrimp + crab + Old Bay seasoning\par
shrimp + crab + pistachio nuts + watercress\par
shrimp + garlic + grits + mascarpone + tomato\par
shrimp + garlic + lime\par
shrimp + garlic + mustard + tarragon\par
shrimp + ginger + green apple + saffron\par
shrimp + horseradish + ketchup + lemon\par
shrimp + white beans + bell pepper + orange + sausage\par
SKATE\par
Season: summer\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: broil, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
arugula\par
bay leaf\par
butter and butter sauces (e.g., brown butter)\par
CAPERS\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery and celery leaves\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
cloves\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
leeks\par
LEMON, juice\par
lemon balm\par
lovage\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pasta\par
pepper: black, green, white\par
pistachios\par
polenta\par
ponzu sauce\par
potatoes\par
pumpkin seeds\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
sake\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
squid\par
star anise\par
tapenade\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine, rice wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine: dry white, red\par
Flavor Affinities\par
skate + butter + pistachios\par
skate + capers + garlic + lemon juice\par
skate + capers + sherry vinegar\par
skate + fennel + onions\par
skate + garlic + sage\par
SLOW-COOKED\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Tips: These herbs and flavorings taste better with longer cooking.\par
For the opposite of slow-cooked, see Freshness.\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
horseradish\par
onions\par
oregano\par
rosemary\par
shallots\par
thyme\par
SMOKED SALMON (See Salmon, Smoked)\par
SMOKINESS\par
Tips: Add a smoky component to provide a \ldblquote meaty\rdblquote  flavor to a dish or to\par
counteract the richness of certain meats and seafoods.\par
bacon\par
barbecued foods\par
beer, smoked\par
cheese, smoked\par
chile peppers, chipotle\par
duck, smoked\par
fish, smoked (e.g., salmon, trout)\par
grilled foods\par
ham, smoked\par
liquid smoke\par
paprika, smoked\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt, smoked\par
sausage, smoked\par
tea, Lapsang Souchong\par
whiskey, scotch\par
SNAP PEAS (aka sugar snap peas)\par
Season: spring\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: blanch, raw, steam, stir-fry\par
almonds\par
basil\par
brown butter sauce\par
butter\par
carrots\par
celery\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
curry\par
dill\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
halibut\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pepper, white\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salmon\par
scallions\par
sesame oil\par
sesame seeds\par
shrimp\par
stock, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
snap peas + brown butter + sage\par
SNAPPER (aka red snapper)\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, broil, deep-fry, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam,\par
stir-fry\par
almonds\par
apricots, esp. dried\par
artichokes\par
basil (garnish)\par
bay leaf\par
bell peppers: green, red, yellow\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery and celery leaves\par
chile peppers: chipotle, jalape\'f1o\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
clams\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
crab\par
cream\par
cumin\par
dill\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
five-spice powder\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
hazelnuts\par
leeks\par
LEMON: fruit, juice, zest\par
lemon thyme\par
lime, juice\par
mint\par
miso: dried, white\par
mushrooms: cepes, chanterelles\par
mustard, Dijon\par
OIL: canola, corn, grapeseed, vegetable\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives: black, kalamata\par
onions: red, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
papaya\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas, sugar snap\par
pepper: black, white\par
pesto\par
pistachios, esp. as crust\par
port\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauces: brown butter, hollandaise, romesco\par
sausage, esp. spicy\par
scallions\par
seaweed (for presentation)\par
sesame\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, fish\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES: canned, fresh, paste\par
turnips\par
vinegar: red wine, sherry, white\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
snapper + clams + romesco sauce + sausage\par
snapper + fennel + olives + orange + saffron\par
snapper + coconut + crab + papaya\par
snapper + garlic + potatoes + rosemary\par
snapper + lemon + thyme + tomatoes\par
SOLE\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: pan sear, poach, saut\'e9, steam\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
basil: sweet, lemon\par
bass\par
bay leaf\par
beans, fava\par
bread crumbs\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery and celery leaves\par
chervil\par
CHIVES\par
coriander\par
cornmeal\par
couscous\par
cream\par
dill\par
endive\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens, collard\par
LEMON: juice, slices\par
lobster\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
milk\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mushrooms: button, morels\par
mussels\par
noodles\par
oil: canola, corn, grapeseed, olive, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. white\par
oysters\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, pink, white\par
potatoes\par
quince\par
ramps\par
salmon\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
sauces: brown butter, hollandaise\par
SHALLOTS\par
shrimp\par
spinach\par
star anise\par
stock, fish\par
TARRAGON\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
truffles\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
watercress\par
WINE, DRY WHITE (e.g., Chablis)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sole + butter + lemon + parsley\par
sole + paprika + potatoes\par
SORREL\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium, soft-leaved\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Always use fresh; as a soft-leaved herb, it will lose flavor in sauces,\par
soups.\par
almonds\par
apples\par
avocados\par
bacon\par
basil\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
carrots\par
caviar\par
chard\par
CHEESE: Emmental, goat, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta, Swiss\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
collard greens\par
CREAM\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
dandelion greens\par
dill\par
EGGS: egg-based dishes, omelets\par
escarole\par
FISH\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
greens\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils, esp. green\par
lettuce\par
lovage\par
marinades\par
meats\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnip\par
pepper: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes, esp. new, russet\par
poultry\par
rice\par
salads (say some)\par
salmon\par
salmon, smoked\par
salt\par
sauces, cream\par
seafood\par
shad\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
SOUPS, esp. creamy vegetable\par
sour cream\par
SPINACH\par
STOCKS: chicken, veal, vegetable\par
stuffings\par
tarragon\par
tea sandwiches\par
thyme, lemon\par
tomatoes\par
trout\par
veal\par
vegetarian dishes\par
vinegar, red wine\par
watercress\par
wine, dry white\par
AVOID\par
salads (say some)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sorrel + butter + chicken stock\par
sorrel + garlic + spinach\par
sorrel + leeks + potatoes\par
sorrel + nutmeg + ricotta cheese\par
SOUR CREAM\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Use fresh, or cook at low temperatures only.\par
baked goods (e.g., cakes, cookies)\par
borscht\par
caviar\par
desserts\par
dill\par
dips\par
European cuisine, esp. eastern and northern\par
fruit\par
horseradish\par
Hungarian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
mustard\par
paprika\par
pepper\par
potatoes, esp. baked\par
Russian cuisine\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
Scandinavian cuisine\par
soups\par
SOURNESS\par
Taste: sour\par
Function: heating; stimulates appetite; increases thirst\par
Tips: Sourness tends to sharpen other flavors.\par
In small doses, sour notes enhance bitterness, while in large doses, they\par
suppress bitterness.\par
apples, tart (e.g., Granny Smith, Winesap)\par
blackberries\par
buttermilk\par
caraway seeds\par
cheese, sour (e.g., ch\'e8vre, other goat cheese)\par
cherries, sour\par
citrus\par
cloves\par
coriander\par
cornichons\par
cranberries\par
cream cheese\par
cream of tartar\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
currants\par
fermented foods\par
fruits: sour, unripened\par
galangal\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes, green\par
kaffir lime\par
kiwi fruit\par
kumquats\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lemongrass\par
lime: juice, zest\par
milk, goat\rquote s\par
miso\par
mushrooms, enoki\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pickled foods\par
plums, esp. unripe\par
ponzu\par
quince\par
rhubarb\par
rose hips\par
sauces, reduced-wine\par
sauerkraut\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
sumac\par
tamarind\par
tomatoes, esp. green\par
verjus\par
vinegars\par
whey\par
wine, dry\par
yogurt\par
yuzu\par
SOUS-VIDE COOKING\par
What sous-vide [\ldblquote under vacuum\rdblquote ] cooking does is give you a long, very\par
controlled cooking time. I like to use it on vegetables because no air hits the\par
vegetable. All the white vegetables come out really white. It also keeps the\par
whiteness in fruits like apples and pears.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DANIEL HUMM, ELEVEN MADISON PARK (NEW YORK CITY)\par
SOUTHEAST ASIAN CUISINES\par
Tips: Balance hot + sour + salty + sweet tastes.\par
chile peppers\par
coconut milk\par
curries\par
fish sauce\par
galangal\par
ginger\par
lemongrass\par
lime\par
mint\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
tamarind\par
vegetables: fresh, fermented\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + fish sauce + lime + sugar\par
fish sauce + lime + tamarind\par
SOUTHERN CUISINE (AMERICAN)\par
baked goods, e.g., biscuits\par
barbecue\par
black-eyed peas\par
chicken, esp. fried\par
gravy\par
greens, esp. collard\par
grits\par
ham\par
pies\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
rice\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea: iced, sweet\par
SOUTHWESTERN CUISINE (AMERICAN)\par
avocados\par
beans\par
beef\par
cheese\par
chicken\par
chiles\par
chocolate\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
corn\par
limes\par
nuts\par
onions\par
pork\par
rice\par
squash\par
tomatoes\par
tortillas\par
SOY SAUCE\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process, or to finish a dish. Use in stirfries.\par
basil\par
beef\par
broccoli\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
coriander\par
fish: cooked, raw\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine\par
Korean cuisine\par
lime juice\par
lobster, raw\par
marinades\par
meats\par
mirin\par
molasses\par
orange zest\par
peanuts\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt\par
scallions\par
seafood\par
sesame oil\par
sugar\par
wasabi\par
Flavor Affinities\par
soy sauce + coriander + honey\par
soy sauce + garlic + ginger\par
soy sauce + molasses + sugar\par
SPANISH CUISINE\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
bay leaf\par
bread\par
chorizo\par
custards\par
eggs\par
fish\par
fruits\par
garlic\par
ham, Serrano\par
hazelnuts\par
lemon\par
meats, esp. roasted\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onion\par
orange\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley\par
peppers, esp. guindilla or piquillo, esp. roasted\par
pine nuts\par
pomegranates\par
pork\par
rice\par
roasts\par
saffron\par
shellfish\par
sherry\par
soups\par
stews\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vegetables\par
vinegar, sherry\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
almonds + garlic + olive oil\par
almonds + olive oil\par
garlic + olive oil\par
garlic + onions + paprika + rice + saffron\par
garlic + onions + parsley\par
red peppers + onions + tomatoes\par
tomatoes + almonds + olive oil + roasted red peppers\par
SPICES (See also individual spices)\par
SPINACH (See also Greens \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bitter\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: boil, raw, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry, wilt\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
*BUTTER, unsalted\par
cayenne\par
chard\par
CHEESE: aged, Comt\'e9, Emmental, feta, goat, Parmesan, ricotta\par
chicken, esp. grilled\par
chickpeas\par
chives\par
crab\par
CREAM / MILK\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
fennel\par
fish (e.g., striped bass)\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
greens, collard\par
Indian cuisine\par
Italian cuisine\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lamb, esp. grilled\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mushrooms, esp. shiitake\par
mustard, Dijon\par
mustard seeds\par
NUTMEG\par
OIL: canola, peanut, sesame, vegetable, walnut\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. sweet\par
pancetta\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
pecans\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
quince\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
saffron\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
salt cod\par
sauces: b\'e9chamel, Mornay\par
scallions\par
SESAME SEEDS\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
smoked salmon\par
sorrel\par
sour cream\par
soy sauce\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
thyme, fresh\par
tomatoes\par
tuna\par
vinaigrette, esp. sherry\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, cider, red wine, rice wine, sherry\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
spinach + bacon + garlic + onions + cider vinegar\par
spinach + bacon + walnuts\par
spinach + chives + goat cheese + mascarpone\par
spinach + cumin + garlic + lemon + yogurt\par
spinach + fennel + Parmesan cheese + portobello mushrooms + balsamic\par
vinegar\par
spinach + feta cheese + lemon juice + oregano\par
spinach + garlic + mushrooms\par
spinach + garlic + sorrel\par
SPRING\par
Weather: typically warm\par
Techniques: pan roast and other stovetop methods\par
artichokes (peak: March\f2\endash\f1 April)\par
asparagus: green, purple, white (peak: April)\par
beans, fava (peak: April\f2\endash\f1 June)\par
cauliflower (peak: March)\par
crayfish\par
dandelion greens (peak: May\f2\endash\f1 June)\par
fiddlehead ferns\par
garlic, green (peak: March)\par
greens: salad, spring\par
lamb, spring\par
leeks\par
lemons, Meyer\par
lettuces\par
lighter dishes\par
limes, key\par
loquats\par
mushrooms, morel (peak: April)\par
onions: spring, Vidalia (peak: May)\par
oranges, navel (peak: March)\par
peas (peak: May)\par
ramps (peak: May)\par
rhubarb (peak: April)\par
soft-shell crabs\par
sorrel (peak: May)\par
souffl\'e9s\par
spices, cooling (e.g., white peppercorns)\par
strawberries\par
tomatoes, heirloom\par
watercress\par
zucchini blossoms\par
SPROUTS\par
Season: year-round\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
Tips: Cook for less than 30 seconds, or they\rquote ll wilt.\par
cucumbers\par
egg salad\par
salads, esp. more delicate sprouts\par
sandwiches\par
stir-fried dishes, esp. heartier sprouts\par
SQUAB\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9\par
bacon\par
beans, fava\par
beets\par
cabbage\par
cherries\par
fennel\par
figs\par
foie gras\par
garlic\par
juniper berries\par
lentils\par
mushrooms, wild, esp. porcini\par
mustard\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions\par
pancetta\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
prunes\par
rice and risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine, esp. red\par
SQUASH, ACORN (See also Pumpkin; Squash, Butternut; and\par
Squash, Winter)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, mash\par
allspice\par
bay leaf\par
butter, esp. brown\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
cinnamon\par
cream\par
eggs, custard\par
garlic\par
ginger, fresh\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
mushrooms, esp. shiitake\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. cipollini\par
parsley\par
pork\par
SAGE\par
salt, kosher\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
vanilla\par
vinegar, sherry\par
Flavor Affinities\par
acorn squash + custard + sage\par
acorn squash + ginger + maple syrup\par
SQUASH, BUTTERNUT (See also Pumpkin; Squash, Acorn; and\par
Squash, Winter)\par
Season: early autumn\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, mash, roast, steam, tempura-fry\par
allspice\par
anchovies\par
apples, esp. green\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
bourbon\par
bread crumbs\par
brown butter\par
BUTTER, UNSALTED\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
celery root\par
CHEESE: Fontina, goat, Gruy\'e8re, PARMESAN, pecorino, ricotta, ricotta\par
salata\par
chervil\par
chestnuts\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers, esp. fresh green, jalape\'f1o\par
chili sauce\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
couscous\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry: paste (yellow), powder\par
duck\par
fenugreek\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
garlic\par
ginger: fresh, ground\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine (e.g., tempura)\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mascarpone\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mushrooms, esp. porcini\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, peanut, pumpkin seed, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS, esp. red\par
orange, juice\par
pancetta\par
parsley,flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pears\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
pumpkin seeds\par
red pepper flakes\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
SAGE\par
salsify\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
sour cream\par
spinach\par
STOCKS: chicken, vegetable\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
truffle oil\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, sherry\par
walnuts\par
watercress\par
wine: dry white, Vin Santo\par
yams\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
butternut squash + anchovies + bread crumbs + onions + pasta\par
butternut squash + bacon + maple syrup + sage\par
butternut squash + bay leaf + nutmeg\par
butternut squash + cilantro + coconut + ginger\par
butternut squash + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + nutmeg + sage\par
butternut squash + ricotta cheese + rosemary\par
butternut squash + risotto + sage\par
SQUASH, KABOCHA (See also Squash, Winter)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
kabocha squash + coconut + sweet curry\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE AND CINDY DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
SQUASH, SPAGHETTI (See also Squash, Winter)\par
Season: early autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, boil, or steam; then saut\'e9\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bell peppers\par
cheese: feta, Gorgonzola, Parmesan\par
chicken\par
chives\par
duck\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
honey, chestnut\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta\par
pepper, ground\par
salt\par
seafood: fish, scallops\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrette\par
SQUASH, SUMMER (See also Zucchini)\par
Season: summer\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, blanch, boil, braise, deep-fry, grill, saut\'e9, steam, stir-fry\par
basil\par
bell peppers\par
butter\par
cheese: goat, Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, Parmesan\par
chile peppers: dried red, fresh green\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry leaves\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
garlic\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mustard seeds, black\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt\par
sausage, Italian\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
turmeric\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
SQUASH, WINTER (See also Pumpkin; Squash, Acorn; and\par
Squash, Butternut)\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, braise, grill, mash, puree, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
allspice\par
APPLES: cider, fruit, juice\par
bacon\par
BUTTER\par
caraway seeds\par
cayenne\par
celery, leaves\par
cheese: Fontina, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, pecorino, Romano\par
chili powder\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
curry\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
honey\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
maple syrup\par
marjoram\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
NUTMEG\par
nuts\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS\par
orange: juice, zest\par
oregano\par
paprika, sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta, esp. ravioli\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pork\par
pumpkin\par
pumpkin seeds\par
quince\par
radicchio\par
red pepper flakes\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
SAGE\par
savory\par
soups\par
stocks: chicken, vegetable\par
SUGAR, BROWN\par
THYME\par
truffles, white\par
vinegar, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wild rice\par
Flavor Affinities\par
winter squash + butter + garlic + sage\par
winter squash + garlic + olive oil + parsley\par
winter squash + onions + Parmesan cheese + chicken stock\par
SQUASH BLOSSOMS (See Zucchini Blossoms)\par
SQUID (aka calamari)\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: deep-fry, grill, marinate, roast, salad, saut\'e9, stew\par
aioli\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
arugula\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
bell peppers: green, red, yellow\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage: green, red\par
caperberries\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chard\par
chile peppers, esp. piquillo\par
chives\par
chorizo\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
cornichons\par
cornmeal (for breading)\par
couscous, esp. Israeli\par
currants\par
GARLIC\par
ginger\par
hoisin sauce\par
honey\par
ketchup\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lime, juice\par
lobster\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
melon, esp. cantaloupe, watermelon\par
oil: grapeseed, peanut (for frying), walnut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, esp. black, kalamata\par
onions, esp. sweet, white\par
orange, zest\par
oregano\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pine nuts\par
polenta\par
potatoes, new\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice: Arborio, bomba\par
risotto\par
saffron\par
salads\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shiso\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
squid ink\par
stock, fish\par
sugar\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
yuzu juice\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
squid + aioli + anchovies\par
squid + basil + bell peppers + chiles + garlic + orange + tomatoes + red\par
wine\par
squid + garlic + lemon + parsley\par
STAR ANISE (See Anise, Star)\par
STEAK (See Beef)\par
STRAWBERRIES\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\f2\endash\f1 sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw, saut\'e9\par
Tips: Adding sugar enhances strawberry flavor, as does adding an acid such\par
as citrus juice or vinegar.\par
almonds\par
amaretto\par
apricots, pureed\par
bananas\par
berries\par
biscuit\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
boysenberries\par
brandy\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
Champagne\par
Chartreuse\par
cheese: Queso de los Beyos, ricotta\par
chocolate: dark, white\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
*CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me de cassis\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
crust: pastry, pie\par
custard\par
elderflower syrup\par
gelatin (for texture)\par
ginger\par
gooseberries\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
grappa\par
guava\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
KIRSCH\par
kumquats\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lime: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, berry or orange (e.g., Cointreau, cura\'e7ao, Framboise, GRAND\par
MARNIER\par
loquats\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
melon\par
mint (for garnish)\par
nutmeg\par
oatmeal\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
papaya\par
passion fruit\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pecans\par
pepper, black\par
pies\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistachios\par
plums\par
pomegranates\par
port\par
RASPBERRIES\par
*RHUBARB\par
rum\par
sake\par
sherry\par
shortcake\par
SOUR CREAM\par
*SUGAR: brown, white\par
tarts\par
VANILLA\par
*VINEGAR, BALSAMIC, ESP. AGED\par
walnuts\par
WINE: RED OR ROS\'c9 (e.g., Beaujolais, Cabernet Sauvignon), sweet\par
white (e.g., Moscato d\rquote Asti, Muscat, Riesling, Sauternes, Vin Santo)\par
yogurt\par
zabaglione\par
AVOID\par
salt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
strawberries + almonds + cream\par
strawberries + almonds + olive oil + balsamic vinegar\par
strawberries + almonds + rhubarb\par
strawberries + balsamic vinegar + black pepper\par
strawberries + black pepper + ricotta cheese + red wine\par
strawberries + Champagne +\par
Grand Marnier\par
strawberries + rhubarb + sugar\par
STRIPED BASS (See Bass, Striped) STUFFING\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
apples\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
celery\par
chestnuts\par
chicken fat\par
chicken livers\par
corn bread\par
garlic\par
mushrooms (e.g., shiitakes)\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
prosciutto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sausage, esp. chicken, pork\par
stocks: chicken, turkey\par
thyme\par
walnuts\par
SUGAR\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling\par
Tips: Balance sweetness with acid (e.g., vinegar) and salt. Avoid dark\par
brown sugar with maple syrup, as the combination is too intense.\par
SUGAR, PALM\par
Taste: sweet\par
Tips: Avoid with lighter dishes, which would be overwhelmed.\par
coconut\par
curries\par
custards\par
desserts\par
Indian cuisine\par
tamarind\par
Thai cuisine\par
SUGAR SNAP PEAS (See Snap Peas)\par
SUMAC\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
allspice\par
avocados\par
beets\par
cheese, feta\par
CHICKEN, ESP. ROASTED\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers\par
chili powder\par
coriander\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
eggplant\par
fennel\par
FISH, ESP. GRILLED\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
kebabs\par
lamb\par
Lebanese cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
lime\par
meats, esp. grilled\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
onions\par
orange\par
oregano\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
pine nuts\par
pomegrantes\par
rosemary\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salt\par
seafood\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish\par
stewed dishes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sumac + lamb + black pepper\par
sumac + salt + sesame seeds + thyme (aka Middle Eastern za\rquote atar)\par
SUMMER\par
Weather: typically hot\par
Techniques: barbecue, grill, marinate, panfry, pan roast, raw\par
apricots (peak: June)\par
basil\par
beans, fava\par
beans, green (peak: August)\par
blackberries (peak: June)\par
blueberries (peak: July)\par
boysenberries (peak: June)\par
cherries\par
chilled dishes and beverages\par
corn (peak: July/August)\par
cucumbers (peak: August)\par
eggplant\par
figs (peak: August)\par
fish\par
flowers, edible\par
garlic (peak: August)\par
grapes\par
grilled dishes\par
herbs, cooling (e.g., basil, cilantro, dill, fennel, licorice, marjoram, mint)\par
ice cream\par
ices\par
limes (peak: June)\par
mangoes\par
melons (peak: August)\par
nectarines (peak: July)\par
okra (peak: August)\par
onions (peak: August)\par
onions, red (peak: July)\par
peaches (peak: July/August)\par
pears, Bartlett (peak: August)\par
peppers\par
picnics\par
plums (peak: August)\par
puddings, summer\par
raspberries (peak: June, August)\par
raw foods (e.g., salads)\par
salads: fruit, green, pasta\par
salsas, fresh\par
shellfish\par
sorbets\par
soups, cold\par
spices, cooling (e.g., peppercorns, white; turmeric, etc.)\par
squash, summer\par
steaming\par
strawberries\par
tomatillos (peak: August)\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables, green leafy\par
Vidalia onions (peak: June)\par
watermelon\par
zucchini (peak: July)\par
SUNCHOKES (See Artichokes, Jerusalem) SWEDISH CUISINE\par
allspice\par
bay leaf\par
cardamom\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
DILL\par
fish\par
ginger\par
herring, pickled\par
meatballs\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
onions\par
peas\par
pepper\par
pickled dishes (e.g., fish, meat, vegetables)\par
potatoes\par
shellfish\par
soups, esp. fruit\par
sugar\par
AVOID\par
garlic\par
piquancy\par
Flavor Affinities\par
beef + bay leaf + dill + nutmeg + onions\par
herring + sour cream + vinegar\par
red wine + allspice + cinnamon + cloves + raisins + sugar\par
veal + allspice + onions\par
SWEETBREADS\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: braise, deep-fry, grill, pan roast, saut\'e9\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
asparagus\par
BACON\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage\par
capers\par
celery\par
celery root\par
cream\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
flour (for dredging)\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
greens\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon, juice\par
liver, esp. duck\par
Madeira\par
mushrooms, esp. wild (e.g., chanterelles, morels)\par
mustard\par
oil, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions: red, white\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
pecans\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
port\par
raisins\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
thyme, fresh\par
truffles, black\par
vermouth\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, red, rice, sherry, white\par
wine, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sweetbreads + asparagus + morels\par
sweetbreads + bacon + capers\par
sweetbreads + bacon + garlic\par
sweetbreads + bacon + onions + sherry vinegar\par
sweetbreads + capers + lemon\par
sweetbreads + celery + truffles, black\par
sweetbreads + hazelnuts + red wine vinegar + walnuts\par
sweetbreads + Madeira\par
sweetbreads + mustard + raisins\par
SWEETNESS\par
Taste: sweet\par
Function: cooling; sweetness satiates the appetite\par
Tips: The colder the food or drink, the less the perception of sweetness.\par
Sweetness tends to round out flavors, while acidity sharpens them.\par
apple: cider, fruit, juice\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
barley\par
basil, sweet\par
beans\par
beets\par
bell peppers: red, yellow\par
brandies, fruit (e.g., Calvados)\par
butter\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
cherries, sweet\par
chestnuts\par
chocolate: dark, milk, white\par
clementines\par
cloves\par
cocoa, sweetened\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
corn\par
corn syrup\par
crab\par
cream\par
currants\par
daikon\par
dates\par
figs\par
fruits: dried, ripe\par
fruit juices\par
garlic, roasted\par
ginger, candied\par
grapes\par
guava\par
hoisin sauce\par
honey\par
jicama\par
ketchup\par
lentils\par
licorice\par
liqueurs, sweet\par
lobster\par
lotus root\par
lychee nuts\par
Madeira\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
melons (e.g., cantaloupe, honeydew)\par
milk\par
mirin (Japanese sweetener)\par
molasses\par
nectarines\par
onions: cooked, sweet (e.g., Vidalia)\par
oranges, sweet (e.g., navel)\par
papaya\par
parsnips\par
passion fruits\par
peaches\par
pears\par
peas and sugar snap peas\par
persimmons\par
pimentos\par
pineapple\par
plantains, esp. ripe\par
plums, sweet\par
plum sauce\par
pomegranates\par
potatoes\par
prunes\par
pumpkin\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rice\par
roasted foods\par
sake\par
scallops, esp. bay\par
sherry, sweet (e.g., cream, oloroso)\par
shrimp\par
squash, winter (e.g., acorn, butternut)\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, palm, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tangerines\par
tomatoes\par
vermouth, sweet\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
watermelon\par
wheat\par
wines, sweet\par
SWEET POTATOES\par
Season: autumn\f2\endash\f1 winter\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, boil, deep-fry, fry, grill, mash, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
allspice\par
anise\par
apples and apple juice\par
bacon\par
bananas\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
BUTTER, unsalted\par
caramel\par
cheeses\par
chestnuts\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
chocolate, white\par
cilantro\par
CINNAMON\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
curry powder\par
custards\par
dates\par
dill\par
duck\par
figs, dried\par
fruits and fruit juices\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens, bitter\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
kale\par
ketchup\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
liqueurs: nut, orange\par
maple syrup\par
meats, esp. roasted\par
molasses\par
mushrooms, chanterelle\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
NUTMEG\par
oatmeal\par
oil: nut, peanut, sesame\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. red\par
ORANGE: juice, zest\par
paprika, smoked\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pecans\par
pepper: black, white\par
persimmons\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
potatoes: new, red\par
poultry, esp. roasted\par
prosciutto\par
pumpkin\par
pumpkin seeds\par
raisins\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
rum\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sausage: andouille, chorizo\par
sesame seeds\par
sour cream\par
stock, chicken\par
SUGAR, BROWN\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, cider\par
walnuts\par
whiskey\par
wine, sweet\par
Worcestershire sauce\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
sweet potatoes + allspice + cinnamon + ginger\par
sweet potatoes + apples + sage\par
sweet potatoes + bacon + onions + rosemary\par
sweet potatoes + chile peppers + lemon zest\par
sweet potatoes + chorizo sausage + orange\par
sweet potatoes + cilantro + lime juice\par
sweet potatoes + kale + prosciutto\par
sweet potatoes + maple syrup + pecans\par
SWISS CHARD (See Chard) SWORDFISH\par
Season: early summer\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, poach, saut\'e9, sear, steam, stir-fry\par
apples, esp. Granny Smith\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, white\par
bread crumbs\par
butter\par
capers\par
caponata\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chili powder\par
cilantro\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cream\par
cumin\par
currants\par
curry\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon, preserved\par
lemongrass\par
lime: juice, leaf (kaffir), zest\par
mint\par
OIL, corn\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. black\par
onions, esp. pearl\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, red\par
pineapple\par
pine nuts\par
pistou\par
potatoes\par
red pepper flakes\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
star anise\par
stocks: chicken, fish, shrimp\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
wine, dry white\par
SZECHUAN CUISINE (See also Chinese Cuisine)\par
Volume: loud\par
Techniques: braise, pickle, roast, simmer, steam, stir-fry\par
bamboo shoots\par
beef\par
cabbage, Chinese\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chili paste\par
duck\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
meats, smoked\par
peanuts\par
PORK\par
soy sauce\par
*SZECHUAN PEPPER\par
tangerine peel, dried\par
wine, rice\par
SZECHUAN PEPPER\par
Taste: sour, hot, pungent\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
Asian cuisines\par
beans, black\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
Chinese cuisine\par
curry powder\par
duck\par
five-spice powder (key ingredient)\par
fried dishes\par
fruits, citrus\par
game\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grilled dishes\par
honey\par
lemon\par
lime\par
meats, esp. fattier\par
mushrooms\par
onions\par
orange\par
peppercorns: black, green, white\par
pork\par
quail\par
salt\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
soy sauce\par
squid\par
star anise\par
stir-fried dishes\par
Tibetan cuisine\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Szechuan pepper + ginger + star anise\par
TAMARIND\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 early summer\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the beginning of the cooking process.\par
African cuisine\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
Asian cuisines\par
bananas\par
beans\par
beverages, esp. fruit\par
cabbage\par
cardamom\par
Central American cuisine\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers, esp. Thai\par
chili powder\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chutneys\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut and coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curries, curry paste, curry powder\par
dates\par
duck\par
fennel seeds\par
fenugreek\par
fish\par
fish sauce\par
fruits\par
game\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
greens\par
honey\par
INDIAN CUISINE\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
Jamaican cuisine\par
lamb\par
Latin American cuisine\par
lentils\par
lime, juice\par
mangoes\par
marinades\par
meats\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
oil, grapeseed\par
onions, red\par
orange\par
paprika\par
peaches\par
peanuts\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rice\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
sea bass\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
soy sauce\par
star anise\par
stews\par
sugar: brown, palm, white\par
Thai basil\par
Thai cuisine\par
turmeric\par
vegetables\par
vinaigrette\par
Worcestershire sauce (key ingredient)\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tamarind + chicken + yogurt\par
TANGERINES (see Oranges, Mandarin) TARRAGON\par
Season: late spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud\par
Tips: Add at the end of the cooking process.\par
acidic foods and flavors (e.g., citrus)\par
anise\par
apples\par
apricots\par
artichokes\par
asparagus\par
basil (say some)\par
bass\par
bay leaf\par
beans, green\par
beef\par
beets\par
broccoli\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
celery seeds\par
cheese, esp. goat, ricotta\par
chervil\par
*CHICKEN\par
chives\par
chocolate\par
corn\par
crab and crab cakes\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
EGGS AND EGG DISHES (e.g., omelets), egg salad\par
fennel bulb\par
fennel seeds\par
fines herbes (key ingredient)\par
FISH\par
French cuisine\par
game\par
game birds\par
garlic\par
grapefruit\par
greens, bitter\par
halibut\par
leeks\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lemon herbs (balm, thyme, verbena)\par
lentils\par
lettuces (e.g., fris\'e9e)\par
lime\par
lobster\par
lovage\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
meats, white\par
melon\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mussels\par
mustard: Dijon, Chinese (ingredient and complement)\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
orange, juice\par
oysters\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY\par
pasta\par
peaches\par
peas\par
pepper, black\par
Pernod\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
radishes\par
rice\par
salads (e.g., fruit, green) and salad dressings\par
salmon\par
salsify\par
sauces, e.g., B\'c9ARNAISE (key ingredient), creamy, hollandaise, tartar\par
savory\par
scallops\par
shallots\par
SHELLFISH\par
shrimp\par
sole\par
soups\par
sorrel\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squash, summer\par
steaks\par
stock, vegetable\par
stuffings\par
TOMATOES\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR, esp. champagne, sherry, white wine\par
wine, red\par
zucchini\par
AVOID\par
basil (say some)\par
desserts\par
oregano\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
savory\par
sweet dishes\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tarragon + anise + celery seeds\par
tarragon + chicken + lemon\par
tarragon + orange + seafood\par
TECHNIQUES\par
We believe that food preparation is 60 percent ingredients and 40 percent\par
technique.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  DOMINIQUE AND CINDY DUBY, WILD SWEETS (VANCOUVER)\par
TEQUILA\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
Cointreau\par
fruit juice\par
ginger\par
grenadine\par
lemon, juice\par
LIME, JUICE\par
MEXICAN CUISINE\par
orange, juice\par
pomegranate, juice\par
sage\par
salt\par
sugar\par
vermouth: dry, sweet\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tequila + cilantro + lime\par
tequila + Cointreau + lime juice + pomegranate juice\par
tequila + Cointreau + lime juice + sage\par
tequila + lime juice + salt\par
TEX-MEX CUISINE (See Mexican Cuisine, Southwestern\par
Cuisine) THAI CUISINE\par
Tips: Authentic Thai cuisine strives for a balance of hot + sour + salty +\par
sweet.\par
basil, Thai\par
bell peppers\par
CHILE PEPPERS\par
cilantro\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
curries\par
fish\par
fish sauce\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
herbs, fresh\par
lemongrass\par
lime\par
mint\par
noodles, as in Pad Thai\par
peanuts\par
rice\par
shrimp paste\par
sugar\par
turmeric\par
vegetables\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + cilantro + coconut milk\par
chile peppers + curry\par
chile peppers + curry + fish sauce\par
chile peppers + curry + peanuts\par
chile peppers + fish sauce\par
chile peppers + garlic\par
chile peppers + peanuts\par
THYME\par
Season: early summer\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Add at the beginning of the cooking process; use dried or fresh.\par
allspice\par
apples\par
bacon\par
basil\par
BAY LEAF\par
beans, esp. dried, green\par
beef\par
beer\par
bell peppers\par
bouquet garni (key ingredient, along with bay leaf, marjoram, parsley)\par
braised dishes\par
bread and other baked goods\par
broccoli\par
Brussels sprouts\par
cabbage\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
casseroles\par
celery\par
CHEESE: FRESH, GOAT\par
CHICKEN, esp. roasted\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
chowders, clam\par
cloves\par
cod\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cranberries\par
curries\par
dates\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
eggs and egg dishes\par
fennel\par
figs\par
FISH\par
French cuisine\par
fruits, dried\par
game\par
garlic\par
Greek cuisine\par
gumbos\par
herbes de Provence (ingredient)\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
Jamaican cuisine\par
jerk seasoning\par
lamb, esp. grilled, roasted\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
legumes\par
lemon\par
lemon verbena\par
lentils\par
lovage\par
marinades\par
marjoram\par
MEATS and meat loaf\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
mole sauce\par
MUSHROOMS\par
mustard\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS\par
orange\par
oregano\par
oysters, esp. stewed\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
parsnips\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
p\'e2t\'e9s\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper\par
pork, esp. roasted\par
POTATOES\par
poultry\par
rabbit\par
rice\par
roasts\par
ROSEMARY\par
sage\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces, esp. rich and/or tomato sauces, red wine\par
sausages\par
SAVORY\par
seafood\par
SOUPS, esp. vegetable\par
Spanish cusine\par
spinach\par
STEWS\par
stocks\par
stuffings\par
tarragon\par
TOMATOES\par
vegetables, esp. winter\par
venison\par
vinaigrettes\par
wine, red, and red wine sauces\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
thyme + goat cheese + olive oil\par
thyme + savory\par
THYME, LEMON (See Lemon Thyme) TOFU\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: grill, saut\'e9, stir-fry, tempura-fry\par
asparagus\par
cabbage, esp. napa\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Japanese cuisine\par
miso\par
mushrooms\par
noodles, esp. soba, udon\par
rice, esp. fried\par
salads and salad dressings\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
tamari\par
teriyaki\par
TOMATILLOS\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
avocado\par
chicken\par
chile peppers, fresh (e.g., jalape\'f1o, serrano)\par
cilantro\par
cucumber\par
fish\par
garlic\par
grilled dishes\par
guacamole\par
lime\par
Mexican cuisine\par
onions\par
pork\par
salsas, esp. green\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
sour cream\par
stews\par
tequila\par
tomatoes\par
TOMATOES\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 early autumn\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, confit, fry, grill, raw, roast, saut\'e9, stew\par
aioli\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
arugula\par
avocados\par
*BASIL: lemon, purple\par
bay leaf\par
beans: fava, green\par
beets\par
BELL PEPPERS: red, green, yellow\par
bread, bread crumbs\par
broccoli\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cauliflower\par
cayenne\par
celery and celery salt\par
CHEESE: blue, Cabrales, cheddar, feta, goat, Gorgonzola, mozzarella,\par
Parmesan, pecorino, ricotta, ricotta salata, sheep\rquote s milk\par
chervil\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
chile peppers: chipotle, habanero, jalape\'f1o, serrano, and/or dried sweet\par
chili\par
chili sauce\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
corn\par
crab\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fennel seeds\par
fish, esp. poached, grilled\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
garlic chives\par
ginger\par
ham\par
hazelnuts\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
leeks\par
legumes\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon balm\par
lime, juice\par
lovage\par
Madeira\par
mango\par
marjoram\par
mayonnaise\par
meats\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
melon, esp. cantaloupe, honeydew\par
Mexican cuisine\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard, esp. whole grain\par
oil: grapeseed, vegetable\par
okra\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives: black, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS, esp. pearl, red, Spanish, sweet, Vidalia, white, yellow\par
orange, juice\par
oregano\par
paprika, esp. sweet\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pasta and pasta sauces\par
peas\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
pineapple\par
pizza\par
port\par
raspberries\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salads, green\par
SALT: fleur de sel, kosher, sea\par
sandwiches\par
sauces\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
Spanish cuisine\par
squash\par
stews\par
stocks / broths: beef, chicken, vegetable\par
strawberries\par
sugar (pinch)\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
tomato paste\par
veal\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, raspberry, red wine, rice, sherry, tarragon,\par
white, wine\par
watermelon\par
wine: red, ros\'e9, vermouth, white\par
yogurt\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tomatoes + avocado + basil + crab\par
tomatoes + avocado + lemon\par
tomatoes + basil + chervil + garlic + tarragon\par
tomatoes + basil + goat cheese\par
tomatoes + basil + mozzarella cheese + garlic + olive oil + balsamic vinegar\par
tomatoes + basil + olive oil + orange juice + prosciutto + watermelon\par
tomatoes + basil + oregano + thyme\par
tomatoes + basil + ricotta cheese\par
tomatoes + chile peppers + garlic + onions\par
tomatoes + fennel + Gorgonzola cheese\par
tomatoes + garlic chives + lemon basil\par
tomatoes + horseradish + lemon\par
tomatoes + olive oil + balsamic vinegar\par
TROUT\par
Season: midsummer\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, panfry, pan roast, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples: cider, fruit\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beans, green\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
bread crumbs\par
brown butter sauce\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
carrots\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
cheese: manchego, Parmesan\par
chili powder\par
corn\par
crayfish\par
cream\par
escarole\par
fines herbes\par
garlic\par
ham, esp. Serrano\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lentils\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
oil: canola, peanut\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
oregano\par
parsley\par
pine nuts\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sauces, b\'e9arnaise\par
shallots\par
stock, mushroom\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vinegar, esp. sherry, wine\par
wine: dry red, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
trout + bacon + lentils + sherry vinegar\par
trout + capers + lemon\par
TROUT, SMOKED\par
Taste: salty\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: loud\par
apples\par
beans, green\par
bell pepper, roasted red\par
cayenne\par
chives\par
corn\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
dill\par
greens, baby\par
horseradish\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
nutmeg\par
olive oil\par
pepper: black, white\par
purslane\par
radishes\par
salt, sea\par
sour cream\par
walnut oil\par
wine, white (e.g., Riesling)\par
Flavor Affinities\par
smoked trout + apples + horseradish\par
smoked trout + cr\'e8me fra\'eeche + dill\par
smoked trout + horseradish + lemon juice + olive oil + purslane\par
TRUFFLES, BLACK\par
Season: winter\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud (in a subtle way!)\par
Techniques: shave\par
bacon\par
beef\par
cauliflower\par
chicken\par
cod\par
eggs: chicken, quail\par
foie gras\par
French cuisine\par
langoustines\par
lemon, juice\par
mushrooms (e.g., cepes, morels)\par
olive oil\par
pears\par
potatoes\par
rabbit\par
scallops\par
shellfish\par
stock, chicken\par
tarragon\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
TRUFFLES, PACIFIC NORTHWEST\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud (in a subtle way!)\par
beef, esp. with black truffles\par
butter\par
celery root\par
crab, esp. with white truffles\par
eggs\par
game birds, esp. with black truffles\par
leeks, melted, esp. with black truffles\par
meats, red, esp. with black truffles\par
pasta, esp. with white truffles\par
potatoes, esp. with white truffles\par
salads, esp. with white truffles\par
seafood, esp. with white truffles\par
shellfish, esp. with white truffles\par
vegetables, root, esp. with white truffles\par
TRUFFLES, WHITE (and White Truffle Oil) (See also Oil,\par
Truffle)\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud (in a subtle way!)\par
Techniques: shave\par
Tips: Shave over dishes at the last minute.\par
artichokes, Jerusalem\par
butter\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
cream / milk\par
eggs\par
Italian cuisine\par
onions\par
pasta\par
pears\par
pepper\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
risotto\par
salt\par
thyme\par
Flavor Affinities\par
truffles + eggs + pasta\par
TUNA\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, poach, raw (e.g., sushi, tartare), saut\'e9, sear,\par
steam, stir-fry\par
aioli\par
anchovies\par
arugula\par
asparagus\par
avocado\par
bacon\par
basil\par
bass, black\par
bay leaf\par
beans: black, fava, green, white\par
beets\par
bell peppers, esp. green, red, yellow\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage, green\par
capers\par
caponata\par
carrots\par
caviar\par
cayenne\par
celery\par
chervil\par
CHILE PEPPERS: dried or fresh, esp. green (e.g., jalape\'f1o, Thai)\par
chili oil\par
chili sauce\par
CHIVES\par
CILANTRO\par
coconut milk\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cornichons\par
cucumbers\par
cumin\par
curry\par
daikon\par
dashi\par
dill\par
eggs (e.g., hard-boiled)\par
fennel\par
fennel pollen\par
fennel seeds\par
fish sauce, Thai\par
fris\'e9e\par
GARLIC\par
GINGER: pickled, fresh, juice\par
honey\par
jicama\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lettuce, red oak\par
LIME, juice\par
mayonnaise\par
mint, esp. spearmint\par
mirepoix\par
mirin\par
miso, sweet\par
mizuna\par
mushrooms: cultivated, shiitakes\par
mustard: Dijon, seeds\par
nectarines\par
noodles: angel hair, vermicelli, rice\par
nori\par
OIL: canola, grapeseed, peanut, sesame, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, esp. black, kalamata, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS: green, pearl, red, Spanish, spring\par
orange, blood or regular, juice\par
pancetta\par
paprika\par
PARSLEY, flat-leaf\par
passion fruit\par
pasta\par
PEPPER: black, green, white\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
radicchio\par
radishes\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
sake\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
SCALLIONS\par
scallops\par
SESAME: oil, seeds\par
shallots\par
shiso\par
SOY SAUCE\par
spinach\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar\par
sweet potatoes\par
Tabasco sauce\par
tahini\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
TOMATOES, tomato juice, tomato paste\par
veal and veal cheeks\par
vinaigrette\par
VINEGAR: balsamic, champagne, red wine, rice wine, sherry, white wine\par
vodka\par
wasabi\par
watercress\par
wine: dry red (Grenache, Pinot Noir, Syrah), ros\'e9\par
yuzu: juice, rind\par
Flavor Affinities\par
tuna + aioli + capers + tomatoes\par
tuna + anchovies + green beans + olives + potatoes\par
tuna + arugula + bacon\par
tuna + avocado + ginger + radish\par
tuna + avocado + lemon + soy sauce\par
tuna + beets + lemon\par
tuna + black pepper + cilantro + cucumber + soy sauce\par
tuna + cilantro + cumin\par
tuna + cilantro + dill + garlic + mint\par
tuna + cilantro + dill + mint\par
tuna + cucumber + ginger + miso + shiso\par
tuna + fennel + fennel pollen\par
tuna + ginger + mustard\par
tuna + ginger + vinaigrette\par
tuna + jalape\'f1o chile + cilantro + ginger + sesame oil + shallots + soy sauce\par
tuna + lemon + olive oil + tomatoes + watercress\par
tuna + sesame + wasabi\par
TURBOT\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: bake, broil, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, steam\par
asparagus\par
butter, unsalted\par
Champagne\par
chervil\par
chives\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
hollandaise sauce\par
leeks\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
marjoram\par
miso\par
mushrooms\par
olive oil\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes, esp. red, white\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salt, sea\par
shallots\par
spinach\par
stocks: fish, mussel\par
tarragon\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
wine: Champagne, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
turbot + butter + lemon + marjoram\par
turbot + caviar + Champagne\par
turbot + lemon + miso + mushrooms\par
TURKEY\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 autumn\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: braise, grill, poach, roast, saut\'e9, stir-fry\par
allspice\par
apples\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cheese: white sheep or goat\rquote s milk (similar to feta)\par
chestnuts\par
chile peppers: dried red (esp. sweet); fresh green\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
corn bread\par
cranberries\par
cumin\par
fenugreek leaves\par
figs, dried\par
garam masala\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapes, white\par
innards: turkey heart, liver\par
juniper berries\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
mushrooms, esp. wild (e.g., chanterelles)\par
oil: canola, grapeseed, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. sweet, white\par
orange, juice\par
paprika\par
parsnips\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
phyllo dough\par
pine nuts\par
potatoes\par
raisins, esp. yellow\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
sausage, esp. Italian\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
stocks: chicken, turkey\par
stuffing\par
sugar\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
vermouth, dry\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white, ros\'e9\par
yogurt\par
TURKISH CUISINE\par
beef\par
chicken\par
cinnamon, esp. in desserts\par
cloves, esp. in desserts\par
cumin\par
dill\par
eggplant\par
fish\par
garlic\par
goat / sheep cheese\par
honey, esp. in desserts\par
kebabs, meat, esp. lamb\par
lamb, esp. grilled\par
lemon\par
mint: dried, fresh\par
nutmeg, esp. in desserts\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper, black\par
phyllo dough\par
rice\par
sesame seeds\par
spinach\par
tomatoes\par
walnuts\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chicken + garlic + paprika + parsley\par
cumin + lemon + parsley\par
eggplant + garlic + meat + onions + tomatoes\par
fish + dill + lemon + black pepper\par
lamb + cumin + dill + mint\par
TURMERIC\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: bittersweet; pungent\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: medium\par
Asian cuisine\par
beans\par
beef\par
butter\par
Caribbean cuisine\par
cheese\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
chutneys\par
cilantro\par
cloves\par
coconut milk\par
coriander\par
cumin\par
*CURRY LEAVES, POWDER\par
eggplant\par
eggs\par
fennel\par
fish\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Indian cuisine\par
Indonesian cuisine\par
kaffir lime, leaves\par
lamb\par
lemongrass\par
lentils\par
meats, esp. white\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
Moroccan cuisine\par
mustard\par
mustard seeds\par
North African cuisine\par
paella\par
paprika\par
parsley\par
pepper\par
pickles\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
poultry\par
ras el hanout (key ingredient)\par
rice\par
sauces, esp. creamy\par
sausage\par
seafood\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soups\par
Southeast Asian cuisine\par
spinach\par
stewed dishes\par
tamarind\par
Thai cuisine\par
vegetables, esp. root\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
turmeric + cilantro + cumin + garlic + onion + paprika + parsley + pepper\par
(Moroccan chermoula)\par
turmeric + coriander + cumin (Indian cuisine)\par
TURNIP GREENS (See Greens, Turnip) TURNIPS\par
Season: year-round\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: boil, braise, deep-fry, roast, simmer, steam\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
butter, unsalted\par
carrots\par
celery root\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
cream\par
curry\par
dill\par
duck, esp. roasted\par
garlic\par
honey\par
juniper berries\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
marjoram\par
nutmeg\par
onions, esp. green, yellow\par
parsley\par
pepper: black, white\par
poppy seeds\par
pork, esp. roasted\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
salt: kosher, rock, sea\par
shiso\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar (pinch)\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
vinegar\par
UMAMI\par
Taste: savory or savory + salty\par
aged foods (e.g., cheese)\par
anchovies\par
beef, esp. aged\par
bonito flakes\par
broccoli\par
carrots\par
cheese, aged (e.g., blue, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, Roquefort)\par
chicken\par
clams\par
cured foods\par
fermented foods\par
fish sauce, Asian\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
ketchup\par
lobster\par
mackerel\par
meats\par
miso\par
mushrooms, esp. shiitake\par
oysters\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
ripe ingredients\par
sardines\par
sauces, meat-based\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
seaweed, dried\par
soy beans\par
soy sauce\par
squid\par
steaks, esp. dry-aged, grilled\par
stocks, meat-based\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea, green\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
truffles\par
tuna\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
walnuts\par
VANILLA\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
allspice\par
almonds\par
apples\par
apricots\par
BAKED GOODS, e.g., cakes, cookies\par
bay leaf\par
beans, black\par
beef\par
berries\par
beverages (e.g., eggnog, soft drinks)\par
brown butter\par
butter\par
butterscotch\par
cakes\par
candies\par
caramel\par
cardamom\par
cheese, ricotta\par
chicken\par
chiles\par
CHOCOLATE\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coconut\par
COFFEE\par
cookies\par
CREAM AND ICE CREAM\par
cream cheese\par
custards\par
DESSERTS\par
eggs\par
figs\par
fish\par
fruits, esp. poached\par
ginger\par
honey\par
*ICE CREAM\par
lamb\par
lavender\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemongrass\par
lobster\par
mascarpone\par
meats\par
melon\par
Mexican cuisine\par
milk\par
mint\par
mussels\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
orange\par
peaches\par
pears\par
plums\par
pork\par
puddings\par
rhubarb\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
salads, fruit\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
seeds: poppy, sesame\par
shellfish\par
soups\par
stocks\par
strawberries\par
SUGAR\par
tamarind\par
tea\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables (e.g., root)\par
vinegar, balsamic\par
whiskey\par
wine, Champagne\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
vanilla + almonds + cream + whiskey\par
vanilla + bay leaf + brown butter\par
vanilla + chicken + cream\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
Season: spring\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: braise (shanks), pan roast (chops), roast, stew (breast,\par
shoulder)\par
almonds\par
anchovies\par
apples\par
asparagus\par
basil\par
bay leaf\par
beans, esp. flageolets, haricots verts\par
beef, short ribs\par
beets\par
bell peppers: green, red, yellow\par
brandy\par
bread and bread crumbs\par
butter, unsalted\par
capers\par
caraway seeds\par
carrots\par
celery\par
celery root\par
cheese: Emmental, Gruy\'e8re, Parmesan, Swiss\par
chervil\par
chile peppers\par
chives\par
cider\par
coconut milk\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers, saut\'e9ed\par
dill\par
eggs, esp. hard-boiled\par
French cuisine\par
GARLIC\par
gremolata\par
ham: smoked, hock\par
hazelnuts\par
Italian cuisine\par
leeks\par
LEMON: juice, zest\par
lemon verbena\par
lime: juice, leaves\par
Madeira\par
marjoram\par
milk\par
MUSHROOMS: button, chanterelle, morels, oyster, porcini, shiitake,\par
white, wild\par
mustard, Dijon\par
nutmeg\par
OIL: canola, corn, peanut, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
olives, black\par
ONIONS, esp. pearl, sweet, white\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
pasta, esp. fettuccine\par
peas, spring\par
PEPPER: black, white\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
rice\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
SALT: kosher, sea\par
shallots\par
spaetzle\par
spinach\par
STOCKS: beef, chicken, veal, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
TOMATOES: canned, paste, plum, sauce\par
truffles\par
tuna\par
turnips\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, chamapagne\par
watercr\'eass\par
WINE, DRY WHITE\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
veal + asparagus + morels\par
veal + basil + lemon\par
veal + capers + lemon\par
veal + cream + mushrooms\par
veal + cucumber + mustard\par
veal + garlic + Parmesan cheese + tomatoes\par
veal + gremolata + orange\par
veal + Marsala wine + mushrooms\par
veal + orange + polenta\par
veal + prosciutto + sage\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  BREAST\par
Techniques: braise, grill, roast\par
beans, white\par
cheese, Fontina\par
garlic\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. Spanish\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
rosemary\par
stock, chicken\par
thyme\par
wine, white\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  CHEEKS\par
When we make veal cheek osso buco on polenta, each dish gets a squeeze of\par
orange and orange zest on it.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  ANDREW CARMELLINI, A VOCE (NEW YORK CITY)\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  CHOP\par
Techniques: braise, grill, pan roast, saut\'e9, stuff\par
artichokes\par
basil\par
beans, esp. fava\par
broccoli rabe\par
butter\par
Campari\par
capers\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
gnocchi\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
Madeira\par
marjoram\par
mint\par
mirin\par
miso\par
mushrooms (e.g., black trumpet)\par
mushrooms, wild, esp. chanterelle, porcini\par
mustard, Dijon\par
olive oil\par
olives: black, kalamata\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
peas\par
pepper, white\par
pine nuts\par
polenta\par
potatoes\par
prosciutto\par
radishes\par
red pepper flakes\par
salt\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
stock, chicken\par
sugar, brown\par
thyme\par
tomatoes, sun-dried\par
watercress\par
wine, dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
veal chop + artichokes + basil\par
veal chop + celery root + cream + Dijon mustard\par
veal chop + garlic + chanterelle mushrooms\par
veal chop + leeks + peas\par
veal chop + leeks + polenta\par
veal chop + mushrooms + watercress\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  LOIN\par
Techniques: braise, grill, pan roast, roast, saut\'e9\par
arugula\par
basil\par
cheese, Fontina\par
chestnuts\par
cider, apple\par
citrus\par
cranberries\par
garlic\par
mushrooms, wild (e.g., chanterelles, morels)\par
nuts (e.g., almonds, hazelnuts, pine nuts, pistachios)\par
onions\par
oregano\par
pasta\par
pumpkin\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
stock, veal\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
tomatoes\par
wine, red\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  SHANKS\par
Techniques: braise\par
bay leaf\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cumin\par
garlic\par
gremolata\par
horseradish\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
marjoram\par
mushrooms, porcini\par
olive oil\par
olives\par
onions, esp. red, white\par
oranges\par
osso buco (ingredient)\par
parsley\par
pepper\par
pine nuts\par
raisins, yellow\par
risotto\par
rosemary\par
salt\par
stocks: chicken, veal\par
thyme\par
tomatoes: paste, sauce\par
truffles, white\par
WINE, WHITE\par
Flavor Affinities\par
veal shanks + capers + gremolata + olives\par
veal shanks + lemon + olives\par
veal shanks + onions + tomatoes\par
veal shanks + tomatoes + thyme\par
VEAL \f2\emdash\f1  TENDERLOIN\par
Techniques: braise, grill, saut\'e9, sear\par
asparagus\par
bacon\par
basil\par
capers\par
cheese, Fontina\par
cream\par
ham\par
mushrooms, morel\par
mustard, Dijon\par
onions, red\par
sage\par
tarragon\par
thyme\par
truffle oil\par
wine, white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
veal tenderloin + asparagus + morel mushrooms\par
veal tenderloin + cream + morel mushrooms\par
veal tenderloin + garlic + pancetta\par
VEGETABLES (See specific vegetables)\par
Tips: Onion enhances the flavor of vegetables, and brings out their\par
sweetness.\par
VEGETABLES, ROOT (See specific root vegetables, e.g.,\par
Carrots)\par
Techniques: roast\par
VEGETARIAN DISHES\par
Tips: To add a deep, meaty flavor to vegetarian dishes \f2\emdash\f1  without adding\par
meat \f2\emdash\f1  try:\par
chile peppers, chipotle \f2\emdash\f1  use adobo sauce from canned chiles\par
liquid smoke\par
miso\par
mushrooms\par
onions, roasted\par
paprika, smoked\par
shallots, roasted\par
soy sauce\par
VENISON (See also Game \f2\emdash\f1  In General)\par
Season: autumn\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Techniques: braise, broil, grill, roast, saut\'e9\par
American cuisine\par
apples\par
artichoke, Jerusalem\par
bacon\par
bay leaf\par
beets\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
Brussels sprouts\par
butter, unsalted\par
cabbage, red\par
cardamom\par
carrots\par
celery\par
cheese, Asiago\par
cherries, dried or fresh, esp. black\par
chervil\par
chestnuts\par
chiles\par
chives\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
cognac\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
currants, dried or fresh, esp. red\par
curries and curry powder\par
fennel\par
garlic\par
gin\par
ginger: grated, ground, minced\par
greens: arugula, chicory, dandelion, m\'e2che, radicchio, spinach\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
huckleberries\par
JUNIPER BERRIES\par
lemon, juice\par
lemongrass\par
lime, juice\par
Marsala\par
mirepoix\par
mushrooms: button, porcini, shiitake, wild\par
mustard\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
nuts: almonds, cashews\par
oil: canola, grapeseed, peanut, walnut\par
olive oil\par
ONIONS\par
orange: juice, zest\par
pancetta\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
parsnips\par
peaches\par
PEARS\par
PEPPER: black, green, pink, Szechuan, white\par
pineapple\par
pomegranate\par
port\par
potatoes\par
pumpkin\par
raisins\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
shallots\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
squash: acorn, butternut\par
star anise\par
STOCKS: beef, chicken, venison\par
sweet potatoes\par
thyme\par
tomatoes and tomato paste\par
turnips, esp. yellow\par
vinegar: balsamic, red wine, rice, sherry\par
watercress\par
WINE: red (e.g., Cabernet Sauvignon), dry white\par
Flavor Affinities\par
venison + curry + pomegranate seeds\par
venison + garlic + juniper berries + rosemary\par
venison + garlic + peppercorns\par
venison + garlic + rosemary + tomatoes + red wine\par
venison + parsnips + pepper\par
venison + pears + rosemary\par
VERJUS\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Tips: Use instead of vinegar or lemon juice, or as a seasoning.\par
Verjus is often more wine friendly than vinegar.\par
apples\par
apricots\par
asparagus\par
berries\par
cheese, goat\par
chicken\par
cranberries\par
cucumbers\par
fennel\par
fish (e.g., halibut, salmon, tuna)\par
foie gras\par
FRUIT\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
herbs (e.g., dill, mint, thyme)\par
lamb\par
lettuces\par
marinades\par
meat\par
melon\par
mustard, Dijon\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
pears\par
pomegranate\par
pork\par
poultry\par
quail\par
quince\par
rabbit\par
SALADS: FRUIT, GREEN\par
sauces\par
shellfish (e.g., crab, scallops, shrimp)\par
soups\par
soy sauce\par
spinach\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tuna\par
vegetables\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
VIETNAMESE CUISINE\par
basil, Thai\par
bean sprouts\par
beef, in soup (pho)\par
chicken\par
chile peppers\par
cilantro\par
cucumbers\par
fish\par
fish sauce\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
lemon\par
lemongrass\par
lettuce\par
lime\par
milk, sweetened condensed (e.g., in coffee)\par
mint\par
noodles\par
pork\par
raw foods\par
rice\par
scallions\par
shallots\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
star anise\par
sugar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
chile peppers + fish sauce + lemon\par
fish sauce + herbs\par
fish sauce + lemon\par
VINEGAR \f2\emdash\f1  IN GENERAL\par
I use a variety of vinegars and right now I am using cider vinegar, balsamic, and\par
white balsamic. What vinegar you grab really depends on how far you can push\par
the product. When we make a walnut sauce, it can handle a good-sized dash of\par
cider vinegar. In a fluke tartare, we\rquote ll only use a drop of vinegar.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  MICHAEL ANTHONY, GRAMERCY TAVERN (NEW YORK CITY)\par
VINEGAR, BALSAMIC\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy (depending on age)\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
Tips: Use when you want a sweet, low-acid vinegar.\par
Add at end of cooking (and never boil!) or use to finish a dish.\par
apricots\par
arugula\par
basil\par
beans, green\par
bell peppers: green, red\par
berries, esp. strawberries\par
brown butter\par
cabbage\par
cheese, Parmesan\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
chicory\par
eggplant\par
endive\par
fish, esp. white\par
fruit\par
greens, salad\par
grilled dishes\par
hazelnut oil\par
honey\par
Italian cuisine\par
marinades\par
meats\par
mustard, esp. Dijon\par
mustard: dry, seeds\par
oil\par
onions\par
pepper, black\par
radicchio\par
raspberries\par
SALADS AND SALAD DRESSINGS\par
sesame oil\par
steak\par
*STRAWBERRIES\par
*TOMATOES\par
vegetables\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: red wine, sherry (blending vinegars)\par
walnut oil\par
watercress\par
white truffle oil\par
Flavor Affinities\par
balsamic vinegar + brown butter + fish\par
white balsamic vinegar + white truffle oil + whole grain mustard\par
VINEGAR, BANYULS\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Can substitute for red wine vinegar. Use to deglaze a pan.\par
beets\par
cheese: blue, Parmesan\par
cream\par
duck\par
fish\par
foie gras\par
honey\par
lettuces\par
marinades\par
meats\par
mushrooms\par
nuts\par
oil: hazelnut,walnut\par
olive oil\par
pears\par
pepper, black\par
quail\par
salads and salad dressings\par
salmon, ivory\par
salt\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
shellfish\par
tomatoes\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
Flavor Affinities\par
Banyuls vinegar + blue cheese + lettuce + pears + walnuts\par
VINEGAR, CABERNET SAUVIGNON\par
We finish most of our jus for meat dishes with cabernet vinegar. If you use it at\par
the beginning of the cooking process, it cooks out because it is so light.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
VINEGAR, CHAMPAGNE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Champagne vinegar is the most delicate vinegar.\par
artichokes\par
avocados\par
delicate dishes\par
fennel\par
fish\par
greens, delicate salad (e.g., baby greens, butter lettuce)\par
leeks\par
oils: nut, truffle\par
olive oil\par
potatoes\par
raspberries\par
salads\par
shellfish\par
strawberries\par
vegetables\par
VINEGAR, CHARDONNAY\par
Chardonnay vinegar is a sweet acid, so you don\rquote t have to add additional sugar\par
to your pickling mixture.\par
\f2\emdash\f1  BRAD FARMERIE, PUBLIC (NEW YORK CITY)\par
VINEGAR, CIDER\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
American cuisine\par
apples\par
coleslaw\par
fruits, esp. in salads\par
ginger\par
grains\par
herbs\par
oil\par
pears\par
peas\par
pork\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
smoked fish\par
smoked meats\par
sugar\par
Flavor Affinities\par
cider vinegar + ginger + sugar\par
VINEGAR, FRUIT\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
avocados\par
chicken\par
fruit salads\par
hazelnut oil\par
meats, white\par
oils, esp. nut\par
peanut oil\par
pears\par
salads and salad dressings\par
turkey\par
walnut oil\par
AVOID\par
cheese\par
eggs\par
VINEGAR, ICE WINE\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate, with 5 percent acidity\par
berries\par
FOIE GRAS, ESP. TERRINE\par
fruit\par
lobster\par
oil: grapeseed\par
onions\par
oysters\par
peaches\par
salads\par
sauces\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
sorbets\par
strawberries\par
vegetables\par
VINEGAR, MALT\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: loud, with moderate acidity\par
Tips: Sprinkle on foods judiciously.\par
dressings\par
fish, fried\par
oil: hazelnut, peanut\par
olive oil\par
pickles\par
AVOID\par
sauces\par
VINEGAR, RED WINE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud, with high acidity\par
Tips: Red wine vinegar can stand up to spices and stronger herbs.\par
beans, green\par
chard\par
cherries\par
chicken\par
cinnamon\par
cold dishes\par
dandelion greens\par
greens: salad, stronger\par
grilled dishes\par
heartier dishes\par
kale\par
marinades\par
meat, red\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
oils, nut\par
olive oil\par
salads and salad dressings\par
sauces\par
spinach\par
tomatoes\par
vinaigrettes\par
VINEGAR, RICE WINE\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet, with lower acidity\par
Asian cuisine\par
cilantro\par
coriander\par
cucumbers\par
fruit, esp. salads\par
ginger\par
honey\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lemon\par
mirin\par
noodles\par
oils: peanut, sesame\par
pepper: black, pink\par
rice (e.g., for sushi)\par
salads\par
salmon\par
scallions\par
sesame seeds\par
soups, esp. creamy, potato\par
soy sauce\par
star anise\par
wasabi\par
VINEGAR, SHERRY\par
Taste: sour, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
apples\par
asparagus\par
beans\par
chicken\par
cucumbers\par
duck\par
figs\par
fish\par
gazpacho\par
greens, esp. bitter\par
meat dishes\par
mustard, grainy\par
nuts\par
oils: nut, walnut\par
onions\par
orange\par
pancetta\par
pears\par
radicchio\par
rich dishes\par
salad dressings\par
salads, esp. with apples, nuts, pears\par
sauces\par
Spanish cuisine\par
tomatoes\par
tortilla, Spanish\par
vegetables\par
VINEGAR, TARRAGON (herb-flavored vinegar)\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
endive\par
lettuces, esp. Bibb, iceberg, romaine\par
oil, mild (e.g., peanut)\par
olive oil\par
VINEGAR, VINCOTTO (Cooked Wine)\par
Taste: sour\f2\endash\f1 sweet\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
bacon\par
cheese, burrata\par
desserts\par
fennel\par
figs\par
fruit\par
Italian cuisine\par
peaches\par
pears\par
plums\par
meats, esp. grilled, roasted\par
salads and salad dressings\par
yogurt\par
VINEGAR, WHITE WINE\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Tips: Can substitute champagne vinegar if needed.\par
artichokes\par
avocados\par
delicate dishes\par
fennel\par
fish\par
leeks\par
oils: safflower, sunflower\par
olive oil (extra virgin)\par
potatoes\par
shellfish\par
VODKA\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
amaretto\par
apples and apple juice\par
beef consomm\'e9\par
beet juice\par
berries\par
blackberries\par
caraway\par
carrots, juice\par
caviar\par
celery and leaves\par
celery root\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cloves\par
coffee\par
coconut\par
cranberry juice\par
cream\par
cucumber\par
currants, black\par
ginger\par
grapefruit juice\par
honey\par
horseradish\par
kaffir lime leaf\par
Kahl\'faa\par
LEMON, JUICE\par
lemongrass\par
lemon thyme\par
lemon verbena\par
licorice\par
lime, juice\par
mangoes\par
maraschino liqueur\par
melon\par
oats\par
olives, green\par
orange, juice\par
pepper, black\par
pineapple juice\par
Polish cuisine\par
pomegranate juice\par
raspberries\par
rose\par
RUSSIAN CUISINE\par
smoked fish\par
star anise\par
sugar (simple syrup)\par
tomato juice\par
triple sec\par
vanilla\par
Flavor Affinities\par
vodka + amaretto + cream + Kahl\'faa\par
vodka + apple + beet + caraway + horseradish\par
vodka + apple + cinnamon + cloves + cranberry\par
vodka + beef consomm\'e9 + celery leaf + horseradish\par
vodka + blackberries + black pepper + rose\par
vodka + carrot juice + lemon thyme + lime\par
vodka + celery + lime juice\par
vodka + cilantro + coconut + lime + sugar\par
vodka + cilantro + lime\par
vodka + coffee + cream\par
vodka + cranberry + orange\par
vodka + cranberry + star anise\par
vodka + grapefruit + maraschino liqueur\par
vodka + honey + oats\par
vodka + lemon + lemon verbena\par
vodka + lime + pineapple\par
WALNUT OIL (See Oil, Walnut) WALNUTS (See also Nuts \f2\emdash\f1  In\par
General)\par
Season: autumn\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
almonds\par
anise\par
APPLES\par
apricots\par
Armagnac\par
bananas\par
bourbon\par
brandy\par
breakfast (e.g., pancakes, waffles)\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
cheese: blue, Cheddar, goat, Parmesan, ricotta, Roquefort, Stilton\par
cherries\par
chestnuts\par
chicken\par
chocolate: dark, milk, white\par
cinnamon\par
coffee\par
cognac\par
cookies\par
corn syrup: light, dark\par
cranberries\par
cream\par
cream cheese\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cumin\par
dates\par
ENDIVE\par
figs, esp. dried\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
grapes\par
hazelnuts\par
HONEY\par
ice cream\par
Italian sauces\par
kumquats\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
liqueurs, orange\par
maple syrup\par
mascarpone\par
Mediterranean cuisine\par
Mexican sauces\par
molasses\par
nectarines\par
oatmeal\par
olive oil\par
orange: juice, zest\par
peaches\par
PEARS\par
pecans\par
pepper, esp. white\par
persimmons\par
pine nuts\par
plums\par
pomegranates\par
port\par
praline\par
PRUNES\par
pumpkin\par
quince\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rum\par
salads\par
salt\par
sauces\par
stuffings\par
SUGAR: brown, confectioners\rquote , white\par
sweet potatoes\par
tea\par
vanilla\par
walnut oil\par
whiskey\par
wine: dry, sweet\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
walnuts + anise + dried figs + orange\par
walnuts + apples + honey\par
walnuts + caramel + prunes\par
walnuts + coffee + cream\par
walnuts + cumin + prunes\par
WARMING\par
Function: Ingredients believed to have warming properties; useful in cold\par
weather.\par
alcohol\par
barley\par
chile peppers\par
coffee\par
cranberries\par
fruits, dried (e.g., dates)\par
garlic\par
grains (e.g., polenta, quinoa)\par
honey\par
hot beverages\par
meat, red\par
mustard\par
nuts\par
oils: almond, mustard\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
spices, warming (e.g., black pepper, cayenne, cinnamon, cloves, ginger,\par
nutmeg, turmeric)\par
vegetables, root (e.g., carrots, potatoes)\par
vinegar\par
walnuts\par
WASABI\par
Taste: hot\par
Weight: medium\par
Volume: very loud\par
avocados\par
beef\par
crab\par
cream\par
fish\par
ginger (e.g., with seafood)\par
JAPANESE CUISINE\par
mirin\par
miso\par
olive oil\par
onions, green\par
rice\par
salmon\par
sauces\par
seafood\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce\par
sushi and sashimi\par
tofu\par
tuna\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
WATER CHESTNUTS\par
Season: summer\f2\endash\f1 fall\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: raw, stir-fry\par
bacon\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
scallions\par
sesame: oil, seeds\par
soy sauce\par
sugar\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
WATERCRESS\par
Season: spring, autumn\par
Taste: bitter, sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
almonds\par
apples\par
asparagus, esp. white\par
bacon\par
bean sprouts\par
beef, esp. roasted\par
beets\par
bell peppers, esp. red\par
butter, unsalted\par
buttermilk\par
cheese: blue, goat, pecorino\par
chervil\par
chicken, esp. roasted\par
Chinese cuisine\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cream\par
cr\'e8me fra\'eeche\par
cucumbers\par
duck\par
eggs\par
endive\par
fennel\par
fish\par
fish sauce, Asian\par
French cuisine\par
garlic\par
ginger\par
Italian cuisine\par
lamb\par
leeks\par
lemon, juice\par
lime, juice\par
mascarpone\par
meats, roasted\par
mint\par
mushrooms\par
mustard\par
OIL: grapeseed, sesame, vegetable, walnut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
onions: red, white, yellow\par
orange\par
oysters\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pears\par
peas\par
pepper: black, white\par
potatoes\par
radicchio\par
rice\par
salads\par
salmon\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
sesame seeds, black\par
sesame oil\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
smoked salmon\par
sorrel\par
soups, esp. Asian, vegetable\par
soy sauce\par
STOCKS: chicken, fish, seafood, vegetable\par
sugar (pinch)\par
tarragon\par
tea sandwiches\par
tomatoes\par
veal\par
vinaigrette\par
vinegar: champagne, red wine, rice, sherry\par
walnuts\par
wine: rice, white\par
yogurt\par
Flavor Affinities\par
watercress + almonds + green apple + pecorino cheese\par
watercress + bacon + cream\par
watercress + endive + Roquefort cheese + walnuts\par
watercress + ginger + lemon + shrimp\par
WATERMELON\par
Season: summer\par
Taste: sweet\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: raw\par
anise hyssop\par
basil\par
beverages\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
CHEESE: FETA, goat\par
chili powder\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
cream\par
cucumber\par
fennel\par
honey\par
jicama\par
kaffir lime\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lime, juice\par
melon, esp. cantaloupe\par
mint\par
olive oil\par
orange\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper: black, white\par
pistachios\par
pomegranate\par
raspberries\par
salads, fruit\par
salt: kosher, sea\par
sorbet\par
soups, esp. chilled\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tequila\par
tomatoes\par
vanilla\par
vinegar: balsamic, rice, sherry\par
Flavor Affinities\par
watermelon + cilantro + cream + tequila\par
watermelon + fennel + lemon juice + parsley + salt\par
watermelon + feta cheese + red onions\par
watermelon + kaffir lime + vanilla\par
WHISKEY (See also Bourbon)\par
Weight: heavy\par
Volume: loud\par
allspice\par
chocolate\par
cinnamon\par
cream and ice cream\par
dried fruits\par
figs\par
ginger or ginger ale\par
honey\par
lemon juice\par
orange cura\'e7ao\par
pears\par
spices: cinnamon, star anise\par
sugar: brown, white\par
sweet potatoes\par
vanilla\par
Flavor Affinities\par
whiskey + cinnamon + dried fruits + ginger + lemon + star anise\par
whiskey + lemon + orange cura\'e7ao\par
WILD RICE (See Rice, Wild) WINE (See individual varietals)\par
WINTER\par
Weather: typically cold\par
Techniques: bake, braise, glaze, roast, simmer, slow-cook\par
bananas\par
beans\par
beef\par
braised dishes\par
broccoli (peak: February)\par
Brussels sprouts (peak: December)\par
cabbage\par
caramel\par
chocolate\par
citrus fruit\par
dates (peak: December)\par
game\par
grains, heavy\par
grapefruit (peak: February)\par
greens, winter\par
lemons (peak: January)\par
lentils\par
limes\par
lobster\par
maple syrup\par
mushrooms, wild (peak: December)\par
mussels\par
orange, mandarin (peak: January)\par
passion fruit\par
pears (peak: December)\par
plantains\par
pork\par
potatoes\par
roasted dishes\par
root vegetables\par
rosemary\par
sage\par
soups\par
spices, warming\par
squashes, winter\par
squid\par
stewed dishes\par
sunchoke\par
sweet potatoes (peak: December)\par
tangerines (peak: January)\par
turnips (peak: December)\par
venison\par
water chestnuts (peak: February)\par
yams (peak: December)\par
YAMS (See Sweet Potatoes) YOGURT\par
Taste: sour\par
Function: heating\par
Weight: medium\f2\endash\f1 heavy\par
Volume: moderate\f2\endash\f1 loud\par
almonds\par
apricots\par
bananas\par
beef\par
beets\par
blackberries\par
blueberries\par
breakfast\par
cardamom\par
cayenne\par
chicken\par
chickpeas\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coconut\par
coriander\par
CUCUMBER\par
cumin\par
curry\par
desserts\par
dill\par
Eastern Mediterranean cuisine\par
eggplant\par
fruit\par
garlic\par
grapes\par
Greek cuisine\par
honey\par
Indian cuisine\par
lamb\par
LEMON: JUICE, ZEST\par
lemon, preserved\par
lime\par
mangoes\par
maple syrup\par
meats\par
Middle Eastern cuisine\par
mint\par
nectarines\par
nutmeg\par
nuts\par
oatmeal\par
okra (e.g., Indian cuisine)\par
onions\par
orange: juice, zest\par
parsley\par
pasta\par
peaches\par
pecans\par
pepper, white\par
pineapple\par
pistachios\par
potatoes\par
radishes\par
raisins\par
raspberries\par
rhubarb\par
saffron\par
salt, kosher\par
scallions\par
squash\par
strawberries\par
sugar: brown, white\par
tamarind\par
Turkish cuisine\par
vanilla\par
veal\par
vegetables\par
walnuts\par
zucchini\par
Flavor Affinities\par
yogurt + apricots + pistachios\par
yogurt + caramel + pine nuts + balsamic vinegar\par
yogurt + cilantro + garlic\par
yogurt + garlic + lemon + salt\par
YUZU FRUIT\par
Season: winter\f2\endash\f1 spring\par
Taste: sour\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: loud\par
apricots\par
beef\par
beverages\par
caramel\par
carrots\par
ceviche\par
chicken\par
Chinese cuisine\par
fish, esp. sweeter, either cooked or raw (e.g., ceviche, sashimi)\par
flounder\par
fluke\par
garlic\par
gin\par
ginger\par
grapefruit\par
greens\par
hamachi\par
hoisin sauce\par
Japanese cuisine\par
lemon\par
mangoes\par
mirin\par
miso and miso soup\par
mushrooms, Japanese\par
OIL: canola, GRAPESEED, vegetable\par
olive oil\par
onions, esp. green\par
orange, juice\par
pepper, black\par
poultry\par
rice\par
salmon\par
scallops\par
seafood\par
sesame seeds\par
shellfish\par
shrimp\par
soy sauce: regular, white\par
sugar\par
tea, green\par
teriyaki\par
Thai basil\par
tofu\par
tuna\par
vinegar, rice wine\par
vodka\par
Flavor Affinities\par
yuzu + caramel + grapefruit + green tea\par
ZUCCHINI (See also Summer Squash)\par
Season: spring\f2\endash\f1 summer\par
Taste: sweet, astringent\par
Function: cooling\par
Weight: light\f2\endash\f1 medium\par
Volume: quiet\f2\endash\f1 moderate\par
Techniques: fry, grill, pan roast, roast, saut\'e9\par
BASIL\par
bell peppers: green, red, yellow\par
bread crumbs\par
butter\par
CHEESE: cheddar, dry feta, goat, Gruy\'e8re, mozzarella, PARMESAN,\par
pecorino, queso fresco, RICOTTA\par
chile peppers: dried red (e.g., chipotle), fresh green (e.g., jalape\'f1o)\par
chives\par
cilantro\par
cinnamon\par
coriander\par
corn\par
cream\par
curry leaf\par
dill\par
EGGPLANT\par
fish\par
French cuisine, esp. Proven\'e7al\par
GARLIC\par
Italian cuisine\par
lemon: juice, zest\par
lemon balm\par
lemon thyme\par
marjoram\par
meats\par
mint\par
mustard seeds, esp. black\par
OIL: pecan, vegetable, walnut\par
OLIVE OIL\par
olives, esp. black, ni\'e7oise\par
ONIONS, esp. Spanish, white\par
oregano\par
PARSLEY, FLAT-LEAF\par
pasta\par
pecans\par
PEPPER: BLACK, WHITE\par
Pernod\par
pesto\par
pine nuts\par
red pepper flakes\par
rice or risotto\par
rosemary\par
saffron\par
sage\par
salmon\par
SALT: KOSHER, SEA\par
sausage, esp. chorizo\par
scallions\par
scallops\par
sesame seeds\par
shallots\par
shrimp\par
sour cream\par
squash, yellow\par
stocks: chicken, veal, vegetable\par
tarragon\par
THYME\par
TOMATOES\par
vinegar: balsamic, champagne, red wine, sherry, white\par
walnuts\par
wine, dry white\par
yogurt\par
zucchini blossoms\par
Flavor Affinities\par
zucchini + basil + garlic\par
zucchini + cream + Parmesan cheese\par
zucchini + eggplant + garlic + onions + tomatoes\par
zucchini + pecorino cheese + pecan oil + pecans\par
zucchini + Pernod + walnut oil\par
ZUCCHINI BLOSSOMS (See also Zucchini)\par
Season: early summer\par
Weight: light\par
Volume: quiet\par
Techniques: fry, steam\par
basil\par
cheese: goat, mozzarella, Parmesan, ricotta\par
corn\par
eggs\par
flour\par
Italian cuisine\par
lobster\par
marjoram\par
Mexican cuisine\par
olive oil\par
onions\par
parsley, flat-leaf\par
pepper, black\par
pesto\par
risotto\par
sage\par
salads\par
salt, kosher\par
savory\par
shrimp\par
soup\par
stock, chicken\par
tomatoes and tomato sauce\par
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS\par
\ldblquote We don\rquote t accomplish anything in this world alone . . . and whatever happens is\par
the result of the whole tapestry of one\rquote s life and all the weavings of individual\par
threads from one to another that creates something.\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SANDRA DAY O\rquote CONNOR\par
We\rquote d like to thank some of the many people whose invaluable threads helped to\par
create the tapestry that is The Flavor Bible.\par
First and foremost are all the experts who took the time to speak with us at\par
length about the way they approach flavor development and innovation \f2\emdash\f1  and\par
whose insights in this book will surely inspire the next generation to new heights\par
of creativity in the kitchen.\par
At Little, Brown, thanks to our editor, Michael L. Sand, whose advice and\par
counsel we are both lucky and grateful to have had leading this team. He was not\par
only a trusted sounding board for editorial issues, but his great taste extends\par
from his keen eye overseeing this book\rquote s gorgeous design to our delectable\par
lunches at restaurants including Alto and Park Avenue Winter.\par
We\rquote d also like to thank the other fabulous folks at Little, Brown, including\par
Sophie Cottrell, vice president and Hachette communications director; Michael\par
Pietsch, publisher; Carolyn O\rquote Keefe and Luisa Frontino, publicists; Peggy\par
Freudenthal, Jayne Yaffe Kemp, and Julie Stillman, copy editors; Jean Wilcox,\par
designer; and Zinzi Clemmons, editorial assistant. Thanks, too, to Karen\par
Murgolo and Jill Cohen, our acquiring editor and publisher, for kicking things\par
off.\par
Many thanks to our inimitable literary agent Janis Donnaud of Janis A.\par
Donnaud and Associates, for sharing her wisdom and her own delicious taste in\par
everything from publisher matchmaking to Moroccan tagines to barbecued\par
spareribs.\par
Photography: Our heartfelt thanks to our photographer and very dear friend, the\par
multitalented Barry Salzman, who created the extraordinary photography for this\par
book. Barry traveled all over to get the right shot and even supplied his own\par
home as a studio. We join Barry in extending thanks to all of the restaurants (and\par
e\par
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS\par
\ldblquote We don\rquote t accomplish anything in this world alone . . . and whatever happens is\par
the result of the whole tapestry of one\rquote s life and all the weavings of individual\par
threads from one to another that creates something.\rdblquote\par
\f2\emdash\f1  SANDRA DAY O\rquote CONNOR\par
We\rquote d like to thank some of the many people whose invaluable threads helped to\par
create the tapestry that is The Flavor Bible.\par
First and foremost are all the experts who took the time to speak with us at\par
length about the way they approach flavor development and innovation \f2\emdash\f1  and\par
whose insights in this book will surely inspire the next generation to new heights\par
of creativity in the kitchen.\par
At Little, Brown, thanks to our editor, Michael L. Sand, whose advice and\par
counsel we are both lucky and grateful to have had leading this team. He was not\par
only a trusted sounding board for editorial issues, but his great taste extends\par
from his keen eye overseeing this book\rquote s gorgeous design to our delectable\par
lunches at restaurants including Alto and Park Avenue Winter.\par
We\rquote d also like to thank the other fabulous folks at Little, Brown, including\par
Sophie Cottrell, vice president and Hachette communications director; Michael\par
Pietsch, publisher; Carolyn O\rquote Keefe and Luisa Frontino, publicists; Peggy\par
Freudenthal, Jayne Yaffe Kemp, and Julie Stillman, copy editors; Jean Wilcox,\par
designer; and Zinzi Clemmons, editorial assistant. Thanks, too, to Karen\par
Murgolo and Jill Cohen, our acquiring editor and publisher, for kicking things\par
off.\par
Many thanks to our inimitable literary agent Janis Donnaud of Janis A.\par
Donnaud and Associates, for sharing her wisdom and her own delicious taste in\par
everything from publisher matchmaking to Moroccan tagines to barbecued\par
spareribs.\par
Photography: Our heartfelt thanks to our photographer and very dear friend, the\par
multitalented Barry Salzman, who created the extraordinary photography for this\par
book. Barry traveled all over to get the right shot and even supplied his own\par
home as a studio. We join Barry in extending thanks to all of the restaurants (and\par
p\cf0\fs22\par
}
 